
Full text of "Lalita Sahasranama with Bhaskararaya\'s Commentary Ed.2"

MANTRA SASTRA 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


BHASKARARAYA’S COMMENTAl 


rT, 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH f 

A OJik . 


R. ANANTHAKRISHNA SASTRY 

(Second Edition ) _ 

Revised and Enlarged 


Published by the Author 



(BLANK PAGE-NO CONTENTS) 



. 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

As a Sanskrit student at Bangalore, my attention was 
first drawn to a Poona manuscript of the Lalitftsahasrana- 
mabhashya in 1886. Five years later, while collecting old 
Sanskrit manuscripts for the Theosophical Society Library, 
where f was the pandit between 1891 and 1902, more 
manuscripts came into my hands. During that period, I 
had to translate the Bhashya into English for the use of 
the late Dr. Subramania Iyer (then Mr.) whose pandit also 
I was. And in 1899, it was printed for the use of the 
public who, I thought, would be very few, belonging to 
the Theosophical Society and understanding such an 
abstruse subject drawn from Mantra S'astras. The difficul¬ 
ties of securing old manuscripts and the dilapidated con- 
■ dition of those secured, rendered the work of translating 
very difficult. 

Since then the subject has become very popular due to 
increased knowledge in every department and to the 
publication of Sir J. G. Woodroffe’s works on Tantras in 
which my English translations of Lalitasahasranama- 
bhashya and Anandalaharl were freely quoted and criticised. 
Then while collecting MSS. for the Mysore Government 
Oriental Library for the next ten years under Mr. A. Maha- 
deva Sastri, a great Sanskrit scholar, I took specif interest 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


in securing the rare manuscripts referred to in the commen¬ 
tary. Next I worked for the formation of a Sanskrit 
Library for the State of His Highness the enlightened 
Maharaja Gaikwar of Baroda. Almost ail the important 
manuscripts connected with the study of mantra S'astras 
are available now in the Baroda, Mysore and Adyar 
Libraries. Many of these have since appeared in print. 
The S'ivastltras frequently referred to for occult doctrine in 
the commentary especially from names 64 to 84 are 
printed in the Kashmere series. The ParastirSma Kalpa 
Sutras on which the whole Tantra works are based are 
printed in the Gaikwar Oriental series. And almost all 
the Tantric works current on VSmamarga can be procured 
in Bengal, printed in Bengali Script. (For the names of 
the Tantras, Agamas and SamhitSs see No. 17 Gaikwar 
oriental series 1466 to 1820.) 

Though the demand for this work was very great for 
the last 10 years or so I could not undertake a second 
edition owing to pressure of work. For on the 5th 
October, 1922, when I closed my work with the Baroda 
Government, the great Poet Rabindranath Tagore engaged 
me as an Honorary worker to help in forming the Viswa- 
Bharati Library at Santiniketan. Another cause for delay 
was the financial consideration. The great occult work 
of Lalita could not be made a commercial concern. The 2,000 
copies of my tamil translation of the Stltasamhita printed 
a few years back at the expense of the late lamented 
Zamindar of Andipatti who wanted to distribute them 
gratis among deserving devotees, unfortunately fell into 
other hands for sale. Then my endeavours to give the 
proceeds thereof to the Ramakrishna Students’ Home at 
Mylapore, proved futile. I was anxious that my present 
work should not meet with the same fate. 

A few earnest devotees have now come forward, 
among whom are a ruling chief in Kathiawar and two 
Maharanis, to meet the expenses, considering it a 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


** Punya ” to spread the spiritual knowledge, and we have 
together undertaken the work. The sale proceeds of the 
work after meeting the expenses of printing, etc., will go 
to a charitable institution as did the proceeds of my 
English translation of Vishnu and S3va Sahasranamas* in 
the last stage of the sale to the T. S. funds. Mr. 
Ramachandra Iyer, a true disciple of that great Yogi, the 
late Maha Swami of Sringeri Mutt was also urging me 
to bring out a second edition and offered me his notes 
prepared under the guidance of that Great occultist. I was 
corresponding with him on the matter but before anything 
could be arranged, unfortunately (for us) he became a 
mukta, a liberated soul. 

However, familiarity with the subject and a number 
of manuscripts connected with it passing through my 
hands for the last 35 years gave me confidence that if I had 
time enough I could revise and re-edit it. Having dedicated 
my life wholly for manuscript works I could not spare any 
time for other work without breaking my vow. But while 
touring for MSS. in Malabar last March in connection with 
Santiniketan Library Mr. Madhava Raja, the President of 
the District Board, Malabar, himself a devotee of Lalita, 
suggested on account of the terrible heat then prevalent 
there that I should suspend my MS. work till the monsoon 
broke in. He kindly offered me a house in Ooty where I 
could stay and bring out the 2nd edition, which I accepted. 

The work is now thoroughly revised ; many obscure 
passages have been made clear and certain others left out 
in the 1st edition have been included. It is a happy 
coincidence that both the editions have come out from the 
Nilgiri Hills. The 1st one was brought out a quarter of a 
century ago at Bhavani House, the summer residence of the 
late Sir K. Seshadri Iyer. And now the second edition has 
made its appearance from Gulai Hind belonging to Mr. V. I. 
Mannadiar Av). of Vadasseri. The Superintendgtt of the 
Yasantha Press has undertaken to expedite the pwming of 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the book. It is due to Devi’s influence that I am able 
to publish the 2nd edition in such a short time. May Devi 
bless him and others referred to above in their spiritual 
advancement ! 


Commentator’s Life 

BhSskararaya, the second son of GambhirabhJrati and 
his wife Konamamba, was born in the village of Thanuja, 
in the Vijaya district in the Maharashtra country. He was 
brought up in his early days in the town of Bh&ga but his 
father soon took him to Benares for his education. He 
learned all the eighteen Vidyas under one Nrisimha and was. 
initiated into the S'rlvidya by Sivadatta Sukla at Surat. 
Then he made a number of pilgrimages travelling as far 
eastwards as Kamarup in Assam, as far south as Sethu, 
in the west up to Gandhara and in the north up to 
Kadar in the Himalayas. He initiated all the Rajas of his 
time into the STividya, built temples in' all important 
centres, and dug up tanks near them. He married and 
lived for some time at Benares with his wife Anandl, where 
he defeated all the other Pandits in assemblies as was then 
the custom. He left Benares and spent some time on the 
banks of the Krishna River and later moved to the banks 
of the Caveri. On the northern bank of the river at a 
place called Bhaskarapura in the Tanjore District he 
established his own Ptlja. He died at Madhyarjuna near 
that place. His contemporaries were Kunkumananda- 
swaipi of Benares, the great devotee of Devi, Narayana 
Bhatt, etc. In one of his works he incidently refers to Sri 
S'ankaracharya’s time, (making adoration to him) as six 
years after the Saka Era, i.e., 1844 years ago. This affords 
a new clue to ascertain the date of our great Acharya, the 
incarnation of S'iva, admired at all times by all scholars. 
This hi«tM-y of his life is extracted from a Kavya of one 
hundredjpd thirteen slokas composed by his direct Sishya 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


of the same family by name Jaganatha (printed in the 
Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay, and added in the Lalita 
Sahasran&ma Bhashya). This Kavya also gives the names 
of thirty-eight of the many works of Bhaskarariiya. 
Lalitasahasranama Bhashya was composed in 1785 8am- 
vasara Era, i.e., nearly two hundred years ago at Benares. 
Setobandha was written four years after, at Saptakotls'vara- 
kshetra in Goa, the site of the present church at Panjim. 
where St. Xavier’s body is preserved. His S'ishya Uma- 
nandanatha speaks of him in his work Umanandapadhati 
on ParasUrSma KalpasQtra thus : “ There was not any part 
on earth unvisited by him, not any king known uninitiated 
•by him, and not any science unknown to him. Indeed his 
form itself is the Paras'akti.” Before him came the great 
Kavindra another Maharashtra brahmin who lived at. 
■Benares and was the teacher to Darashaoko (see Kavindra 
list No. J.7 Gaikwad’s oriental series). 

These great and typical brahmins have incarnated 
themselves to help those less advanced in spirituality. 
Amongst Bhaskararaya’s works on different subjects, the 
PrasthSnatraya works on Devi are VarivasySrahasya. 
Lalit-isahasranSmabhashya and Setubandha which are held 
in high esteem for their literary merits and spiritual 
thoughts. 


The Cult of S'rIvidya 

Anyone going through this present work patiently 
from beginning to end, though he will find the idea scatter¬ 
ed about and not condensed at one particular place, as was 
the case in all our old writings, will easily understand 
what our spiritual practice was in ancient days. The 
Kundaiinl S'akti should be aroused from its place which is 
at the beginning of the spinal cord (Mflladhiira) and be led to 
the cerebrum (Sahasrara). The next stage is Sami^ii where* 
Devi is realised in one's own self. This was the experience 



I.AMTA S AHASBANAWA 


of all our great AchSryas (see Saun. slo. 10, and the com¬ 
mentary on the names 90 to 111 of this book). It 
would be superfluous on my part to write an essay on this 
occult subject swelling the pages of this book, as promised 
in the introduction of the first edition. So the pious and 
earnest readers are referred to this great work, where all 
the essential cults of our ancients, are carefully recorded. 

In this connection I njention for the benefit of the 
children of our Aryan Beligion the following practices 
preparatory to the above process. One should get up very 
early in the morning and after finishing the morning 
ablutions should take breathing exercise in a well venti¬ 
lated place. This is done by inhaling and exhaling the 
breath deeply through one or both nostrils for about ten 
minutes, sitting cross-legged and facing east or north. This 
must be followed by the “ Kumbhaka ” practice for five 
minutes. According to this one should, after inhaling, 
retain the breath as long as possible without straining 
himself before he breathes out again. 

The third practice is the “ Bhasra ” (Bellow) practice. 
This is done for the next five minutes by automatically 
pressing the belly backwards in quick succession by con¬ 
tracting the muscles of the stomach for exercising the 
smaller intestines. This may be repeated at sunset also by 
one with an empty stomach. It improves greatly the 
digestive powers and keeps the bowels in order. It helps 
the free circulation of blood and is good for the lungs. 

These practices do not require any special instructions 
from a teacher and are quite harmless. They ought to be 
continued systematically every day in one’s life. This may 
be practised by all persons irrespective of age or sex, ex¬ 
cepting women in a family way who should not attempt the 
“ Bbasra ”. But chronic patients afflicted with bowel or 
lung diseases should be carefully guided by a scientifically 
trained instructor. Before starting to do it he may pray for 
protection the universal mother repeating the first name of 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


this work, viz ., S'rlmAthA and at the finish he may conclude 
by prayer to LalitAmbikA (the last name). Among the 
schools started lately for the benefit of our degenerated 
youth—degenerated under a faulty system of education and 
dissipating habits, what with artificial stimulants such as, 
coffee and tea and what with an artificial standard of living 
—is the famous one at Lonavla, a beautiful sanatorium in 
Poona district. Its experiments supported by X-rays are 
recorded in its Quarterly Journal called the Yoga-MimAmsa. 
May our young generation take up these practices and 
become a healthier nation, is the pious wish of the author ! 

Text 

LalitAsahasranAma containing 320 S'lokas in three 
chapters occurs in the second part of the BrahmAnda PurAna 
which is ‘the last of S'ri Veda VyAsa’s 18 Pu rAnas. Even a 
cursory reading of this will impress one with the impor¬ 
tance attached by S'ri Veda VyAsa to the subject of Mantra 
SAstra in the last of his PurAnas. The PurAnas have come 
to ns as an explanation to Some abstruse Yedic passages, 
elaborated with some histories of past students. Of course, 
Some accretions naturally crept in in the long run which 
make Some scholars think lightly of them. For instance 
a two hundred year old manuscript entitled the Brahma 
Gita YyakhyA on Suta SamhitA, by VidyAranya on Aitareya 
Upanishad (No. 24, 1895—1902 collection) which reached 
my hajgds while examining man n sort pts last November and 
December as an honorary worker for the Bhandarkar’s 
Oriental Institute, Poona, contains only thirty S'lokas 
whereas the present printed one contains more than hun¬ 
dred S'lokas dealing elaborately with the subject and touch¬ 
ing a little on other subjects as -well. Our ancient Kishis 
have attached more importance to the passages of the 
PurAnas than those of the Vedas where the PurAnas were 
treated as part of them and not as separate literature (see 



LAL1TA 9AHASRANAMA 


Br. Up., II-4-10). It -will be seen from Pa uranic manuscripts 
of the tenth to thirteenth centuries which are very rare to 
secure that the PnrSnas were intended to explain the Vedic 
doctrines to lay minds. But like every other subject, they 
have degenerated to such an extent that they have loBt their 
real significance and have come to be treated as some 
childish story. In these days both the reader and the 
hearer of the Puranas are generally uncultured. The 
former especially has no spirituality in him and the reading 
has become a profession for him as a means to his 
livelihood. With the revival t>f our spirituality, I hope, 
the Puranas will regain their original place. 

Commentators 

1. The commentator Vimars'anandanatha is a pupil of 
Vimalanandanatha whose commentary is a Short one 
containing about 2,000 granthas. We do not know much 
about his history. The MS. was lately discovered in 
Conjeevaram, the old centre of learning and it was much 
injured by worms and was given to the Adyar Library. 

2. Vidyaranya Munlsvara is another commentator 
who was a disciple of Anantiiranyaptljya. His commentary 
contains about 1,500 granthas. We do not know whether 
this Vidyaranya Muni is the same person who commented 
upon the Vedas under the name of Sayana. But according 
to tradition S'ri Vidyaranya Swami wrote a great treatise on 
Mantra S'astra (may be the book Vidyarnava, a ctgaplete 
MS: of it is in the Jammu Library, Kashmere) and built the 
Sringeri Matt and S'richakra tower over it. His commentary 
is for the thousand names only, and a complete copy of his 
work has not been secured yet. 

3. BhaM.anarfiyana. His commentary consists of 2,500 
granthas. Little is known of him excepting that he was 
born of Venkaiadri, the ineulcator of Advaita Vidya to 
bis wife Narayanamba and that he was the pupil of 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


ParasTvknandanatha. Wherever I found that Bha^anSrayana 
differed from BhaskararSya, or gave more meanings than 
the latter has given, I have quoted the extracts from his 
(Bhattanarayana’s) commentary. (All the commentators 
divide the book in twelve divisions : see page 27, Foot 
note 3.) 

4. The next commentator was one Sankara who gives 
only ordinary meaning^. His work is not of much 
importance. 

5. Bhaskararaya. He is the author of the present work, 
which is presented to the public in English garb. He 
freely quotes a number of his predecessors whenever he 
plunges into occultism for the meaning of the names. But I 
think he depends largely for his ideas on the first mentioned 
commentary. We do not know how many commentaries 
were written before this. But I find lie depends more for 
his authbrity on Saundaryalaharl of S'ankaracharya (the 
first 41 slokas are called Anandalahari and the remaining 42 
to 100 slokas are termed Saundaryalaharl) and on his Guru’s 
Guru Gaudapada’s works. The Saundaryalaharl with a 
number of Commentaries on it has become so popular 
throughout the length and breadth of India that I used to 
find manuscripts of the same spread from Manasarover to 
Cape and Gandhar to the Chinese Wall. About a hundred 
of the commentaries with the text have been secured and 
deposited in the libraries assisted by me. 

I have added to this book the Sanscrit text corrected 
and carefully prepared according to the commentary for the 
use of Parayana (the daily reading). The thousand names 
are thousand Mantras. I used to witness in many houses 
and temples where Lalitasahasranama Archana was per¬ 
formed on Fridays and other auspicious occasions, the 
performers and Ptijaris owing to their ignorance torture 
the names. By this practice according to our S'astras, not 
only do we not get the desired results as described in the 
result-chapter, but we get bad results as well. For instance 



LALITA sahasranama 


xii 

when people generally visit Conjeevaram or Madura the 
Pfljari performs the Lalitasahasranama Archana to the 
Goddess by these names. But as the pilgrims themselves 
are ignorant it does not strike them if the Mantras are 
correctly uttered or not. Fortunately it is not the case in 
the temples of the north where, being Vedic ones, the 
Paja is performed by the visitors themselves and not by 
proxy. I hope this edition wiU be useful for the correct 
performance of the POja in the north as well as in the south. 
I hope also to see at an early date the establishment of an 
university in the South with the superfluous Temple funds, 
to train up the Polaris in our occult sciences, for the 
resuscitation of our declined spirituality to its prestine 
purity which alone can bring true happiness to the 
Bharata Khanda, the land of our Rishis. 

Om Tat Sat 

Gulai Hind ° 

Ootacamund 

22-6-25 


R. A. Sastry 



BENEDICTION 


I BOW down to Lalita, the supporter o£ the universe, 
the ruler of creation, preservation, and destruction, the 
Srlvidya, the eternal, the great Tripurasundari. She 
' should be contemplated as the great Tripurasundari, 
bright as millions of rising suns, and armed with the 
noose, the elephant hook, the bow of sugar-cane, and the 
arrows of flowers. 1 


INTRODUCTION TO BHASKARARAYA’S 
COMMENTARY 


I. He who was born to the learned Gambhlra in the 
womb of Konamamba, who has penetrated to the heart of 
the eighteen sciences ( Vidylls) through Sri Nrisimha, his 
guru, and who has been fully consecrated 2 by the holy 
S'ivadatta Sukla—he believes the three protectors 8 to be 
the three sacred fires, the three cities (of Tripura Devi) and 
the three Vedas. 


1 For the meaning of noose, etc., see names 8 to 11 of the 
Sahasranama. 

1 Initiation is of two kinds, DIksha and Purna. 
s Gambhlra (father), Nrisimha (Vidya gum), and S'ivadatta 
(DIksha guru). 



LAMTA SAHASRANAMA 


II. Bhasuranandanatha,' protected by the venerable 
Gurus, makes this commentary on the thousand names of 
Lalita, which are very secret and deserve to be honoured by 
great men, explaining all the technical rules ( Paribh&sh&s ) 
composed by his Gurus. 

III. By the eight divine and powerful deities ot 
speech, at the command of the Mother, were first composed 
the thousand divine names of Lalita; and this created 
wonder in Brahma, Vishnu and <fther gods ; how then can 
a man like myself interpret even a single name ? 

IV. Yet, one of the deities of speech, moved in the 
depth of her heart by the divine Mother, the holder of the 
thread (the thread on which the universe is strung), dances 
on the tip of (my) tongue which is purified by the water 
which has bathed the feet of my three Gurus, and I accept 
the deity as my own self. 

V. There are many assemblies of learned men, in 
the East extending as far as KamarOpa watered by the 
river named after the son of Brahma, in the West as far 
as Gandhara watered by the Sindhu (Indus), in the South as 
far as Setu (the bridge) constructed by Brl Rama, and in the 
North as far as Kedara impenetrable on account of snow. 
May this, my effort please them, though it is impossible 
to please the ignorant. 

The worship of BJtagavatt is the only method of 
attaining all human desires 1 2 3 * * ; the repetition of the thousand 
secret names is the best way to approach her ; this method 
can only be ascertained from great teachers. Nrisimha- 
nandanatha, my revered guru, out of compassion for his 
disciples 8 reveals these mysteries and composes this 

1 The name assumed at initiation. 

2 Dharma (virtue). Artha (wealth), Kama (desire), and Moksha 
(salvation). 

3 Nrisimha composed forty verses forming a commentary on 

the original Chchalakshara Sutras, which are 24 in number, and 

Bhaskararaya’s commentary is based on them and on this Sahasra- 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


auspicious S'loka for the sake of his students though he 
himself is above all difficulties : 

(Verse I) : “ I praise Tripura who is the treasure-house 
of the race ( Kulanidhi.), who is of red complexion, whose 
limbs resemble those of Kamaraja, who is much praised 
by the three gods of the three qualities (gunas), who is a 
secret deity (Ekamtam), who dwells in the Bindu, and who 
manifests the universe.” 

Tripura : She who has three Puras (lit. cities), i.e., 
circles, angles, lines, syllables, etc. The Kalika Purana 
says :, “ She has three angles as well as three circles and 
her Bh'tpura is three-lined ; her Mantra is said to be of 
“three syllables, and she has three aspects. The KundalinI 
energy also is threefold in order that she may create the 
three gods ; thus since she is everywhere triple, she is 
called Tripura.” (Vide name 626.) 

Kulanidhi : Kula, genus, family ; Nidhi , treasure- 
house ; she is the result (Nidhi) of the Unity {Kula) of the 
measurer, the measured, and the act of measuring, 
because Jndna (knowledge) exists only when one says “ I 
know this pot.” The venerable Acharya 1 says, (Dakshinu- 
mOrtyashtaka, verse IV) that when one says “ I know, 
all the universe simply reflects his light.” According 
to the Kosa, Kula means class. “ Or, Kula may mean 
the spiritual hierarchy beginning with Paramasiva and 
ending with one’s own Guru. The Mahabhashya says 1 : 
44 Family is of two kinds, one derived from birth and 
the other from learning.” Or, Kula, conduct; for, 
Bhavishyottarapurana says 44 Kula does not ■ mean 
family, but right conduct, 0 King; he who is devoid 
of right conduct is happy neither here nor hereafter.” Or, 
Kula means the road of Sushumna. Ku, earth ; la, 
absorption ; Kula, that in which the talva of the earth is 

1 By' the word Acharya, the commentator always means S’rl 
JfaukarAchSrya. 

* This is not to be found in the printed editions II—1—18. 




LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


absorbed, i.e., the Mlltadhara centre. 1 As Devi dwells in 
that centre she is called Kulanidhi. o 

The three gods : Vishnu, Brahma and Rudra, of the 
Satva, Rajas and Tamas qualities respectively. 

Ekamtam :—Eka a (3f) + i (f)=e, according to 

the rule of Karmadharayasamdsa, means S'ivaMina (the 
desire of S'iva) ; hence Eka means the wife of S'iva. Vis'va G 
(a lexicon) says “a, (sf) means Brahma, Vishnu, la's and the 
tortoise.” Anekarthadhvanimanjarl (another lexicon) says 
“ i (?) means Manmatha ” (Kama or desire). 

Bindu : Sarudnandamayachakra (the 9th chakra in the 
Sri chakra). 

Next is shown how the.names are indicated in the 1 
above verse. They are as follows : Tripurd, Pa represents 
one, Ra the number two. Vararuchi says : “ The consonant 
groups Ka, Ta, Pa, Ya, etc., represent numbers {i.e., Ka, 
one, kha two, Ga three, etc.) The vowels {i.e., A to Ah 16 
in number) and na denote cipher.” The counting is from 
right to left. The same rule is to be observed in all the 
following words. Thus Pura means twenty-one. There 
are twenty-one names in the S'ahasranama beginning with 
word Tri, e.g., from Trinayana, (453) to Trikonaga (986). 

Kulanidhi : The word nidhi represents nine. There are 
nine names beginning with the word Kula, from Kulamritai- 
karasika (90) to Kulartlpinl (897). 

Arunas’riyam : Aruna=Sflrya, represents twelve, Sri, 
i.e., the names beginning with S'rl are twelve, from S'rlmata 
(1) to S'rls'iva (998). 

Kamaraja, Raja, sixteen ; the names beginning with 
Kama are sixteen from Kames'abadha, etc., (30) toKamakeli- 
tarangita (863). 

Viddhanglm ; Dha, nine, ga, three i.e., 39. There are 
thirty-nine names beginning with Vi, from Visukraprana- 
harana (76) to Viragint (937). 


’ Kundalitil energy is said to sleep in the Muladhara. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Trigunaih : there are three names beginning 'with 
Guna, as Gunanidhi (604) Gunapriya, (722) Gunatltil (961). 

Ninutam : Na represents cipher, Ta 6. The names 
beginning with Ni are 60, from the names Nijaruna, etc., 
(12) to NiralambS (877). 

Ek&mt&m : there is only one (Eka) name, beginning 
'with Tam, i.e., TUmbfilapOritamukhi (559). 

Bindugcun : Gam 3 ; there are 3 names beginning with 
Bindu, as Bindumandala, etc., (380) Baindavasana, (905) 
and Bindutarpana, etc., (974). 

Mah&rambham : Ra 2. Bha 4, i.e., 42. There are 42 
names beginning with Maha as from Mahalavanya, etc., (48) 
to Mahes'I (932). 

II. We will explain concisely the Paribhashas (techni¬ 
cal rules) which follow the chchalakshara Sfltras 1 belonging 
to Lalitasahasranama to please the Kaulas, 

Kauias. The worshippers of Vidya. We will show 
as occasion arises that the Chchalakshara Sfltras are not to 
be easily understood. The Paribhashas can be easily under¬ 
stood. Hence the Paribhasha verses. 

III. The introductory part (of this Sahasranama) 
contains 51 verses. The names are contained in 182M 
verses. The concluding part has 86H verses. The total is 
320 verses. 

IV. (The 51 verses of the first part) are divided as 
follows : 10 are of Agastya, 1 of Sflta, 16 H of Hayagrlva, 
314 of Devi, 9H of Hayagrlva, 9 M. of Devi, and the last 
one is DhySnas'loka. Thus the speeches are to be taken 
respectively. 

Agastya the great m uni, the first amongst the devotees 
of S'rlvidya, learned from Hayagrlva, his revered guru, the 
Mantra, Ny&sa, PfljS, Purascharana, Homa, Rahasya, and 

1 This is an index to this Sahasranama consisting of 24 aphorisms 
like the Sarvanukramauikas (indices) to the Yedas. Ido not know who 
the author of this is, nor is the name of the Sutras to be found in 
any of the catalogues of public or private libraries. There is a book 
of this name which describes the Svaras of Simaveda. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the S'totras of S'rl mata (Holy Mother) as treated in seven 
respective chapters in the Brahmandapurana ; he also learned 
all about her origin and many other secret filings; and, 
wondering why he, a devotee, was not taught the thousand 
most secret names whose existence he discovered by the 
power of his penance ( Tapas ), he thus questioned his guru. 



CHAPTER I 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Agastya said : 

, 1. 0 horse-faced one, of great wisdom, well versed 

in all the S’Sstras, you have related (to me) the most 
wonderful history of Devi Lalita. 

Agastya derives his name from Aga, a mountain, and 
stya, to fix. The story is related at length in the KSsikhanda 
(Book I, Chap. 5) to which we refer the reader. Horse-faced 
one : Hayagrlva. The story is found in Devi Bhagavata 
(1—5). Once, being extremely tired with keeping awake in 
order to protect the sacrifices, etc., Lord Vishnu fell fast 
asleep, resting his head on his bow. Brahma, Rudra and 
others, wishing to awaken him for some particular purpose, 
induced the white ants named Vamris to bite through the 
bow-string, promising them in return a portion of the sacri¬ 
fice. It was done, and the tremendous bow, being released, 
took off the head (of Vishnu}. They searched in sorrow for 
the head but in vain, and in the end Tripurasundarl being 
worshipped, directed them to join the head of a horse to the 
body and disappeared. That was Hayagrlva, Vishnu 
revived, and he, after killing an asura of that name, learned 
all the secret sciences direct from Devi. So Hayagrlva is 
Vishnu himself. This story reminds that Devi has already 
shown her grace to Hayagrlva. 

‘Lalita ; lit. one who plays. The PadmapurSna says : 
“Having passed beyond the worlds she plays ; hjgice she 




IjALITA SAIIASRANAMA 


is called Lolita." Above S"akti and Siva, there exist various 
manifestations of ParSs'akti and of SadSs'iva ; each has its 
own grades and spheres ; but Mahas'akti, which is the same 
as Parastva, crossing all worlds, has her residence in that 
supreme sphere called Mahakailasa, Apar&jita, etc. Her 
body is formed of pure and concentrated Satva without any 
admixture of Rajas and Tamos ; whereas the other S'aktis 
merely have a preponderance of the Satva quality over the 
other two (Rajas and Tomas') and not of pure Satva. 
Hence she is the highest, the prototype of Parabrahman. 
There are many secret manifestations of this Goddess, but 
in this work that particular manifestation termed Kames’varl 
and known as Lalita is referred to. 

Lolita also indicates that this (deity) is fond of elegant 
things ( Sringararasa ). 

The most wonderful: because such history was not 
heard of before, nor was it similar to any. 

2. You related to me in detail, first the birth of the 
Mother, then Her coronation and Her slaying of Bhanda- 
sura. 

Birth: The Ssrutis say “Verily this was Amt (non- 
being) in the beginning.” (Tai.-TJp., II, 7); “In the 
beginning, 0 child, this was Sat (being) only ” (Chh.-Up., 
VI, 11) ; “ There was, at that time, neither Sat nor Asat 
etc.” (Tai. Br., II, 8—9—3). From these S'rutis we gather 
that before manifestation there existed absolute conscious¬ 
ness. But how the first manifestation, the germ of desire 
(Kamakalarupa ), arose in it, can be known from the Guru 
al6ne. Or birth means one of her incarnations from the 
sacred sacrificial fire. 

Coronation : her initiation into the rulership of the 
whole universe. 

3. The Sripura (Srichakra) has been minutely described 
to us in all its glory ; as also the greatness of the fifteen- 
syllabled Mantra (Panchadas’l). 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


• S'ripurn is, described in the Rudrayamala,* as existing 
beyond and above the innumerable world-systems and as 
' surrounded by twenty-five walls, each of many thousand 
Yojanas in length. This is one description. Lord Durvisa, 
the prince of teachers, has also described it concisely in the 
Lalit&stavaratna 2 as situated at the top of Mount Meru and 
of equal magnificence. This is another description. T^e 
commentator on Vidyaratna 8 places it in the middle of the 
ocean of milk ; and this is the third. 

Fifteen-syllabled Mantra : Panchadan. It is divided 
into KadividyQ. and Hadividya, and may mean here either 
of the two. 

* The addition of the syllable S'rlm in that Mantra is sup¬ 
ported by a quotation from the Sruti (Rig-veda, Y, 47—4) : 
“That which contains four Ims (flf), and confers benefit.” 
Some say that this (the word Sri) is extremely secret, and 
should be known by tradition alone. Other great men do 
not hold it (the four Ims ) as authoritative, because it is not 
found anywhere in the Tantras. But others say that the 
above-quoted S'ruti (Rigveda) refers to the sixteen-syllabled 
Mantra, as it is said “ when the letter S'rl is added at the 
end of the Mantra called KSmaraja, it consists of sixteen 
syllables and is called S'rlvidyS.” Others again say it 
means a certain Mantra discovered by Hayagriva. Sri 
means holy, in this case. 

4. In the NySsakhanda, the Nyasas such as Shodha- 
nyasa have been described ; the method of AntarySga 
(inner sacrifice), as also that of Bahiryiga (external 
sacrifice). 


1 As voluminous a work as the Mahabharata, and said to contain a 
lakh and a quarter of verses (Granthas). Only fragments of this 
book now exist. 

’This work has been printed in the Kavyamala Series, Bombay, 
Part X ; it contains 213 s'!okas. 

* This book is not mentioned in any catalogue, and may mean 
Panchadas'l. ^ 

2* m 



10 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


5. And Mahay figa (great sacrifice) has been described 
in the Piijakhanda ; in the chapter on Puras'charana yon 
have told us the rules of Japa. 

The six principal Nyasas are Ganesa, Graha, Nakshatra, 
Yogini, R-Wi, and Pitha ; these are collectively called 
Shodhanyasa, and that itself is of various kinds, viz., 
Bfiflshaiia, Malinl, etc. There are also Chakra Nyasa and 
other Nyasas . 1 * 

Nyasa means meditating upon a particular Devata as 
placed in a corresponding part of the body. 

Antaryaga is meditating on the thread of light 
proceeding from the MOladhara up to Rajadanta ; or the 
mental worship of the Devata. 

Bahi/ryaga consists of the account of the rites and 
arrangement of the vessels up to S'antistava (a hymn on 
tranquillity). 

Mah\yhga : the same ( Bahiryaga ) is performed with 
eight Ashtakas. All this we have dealt with in our book 
on Yarivasya prakasa 3 * * * * in the PajSprakarana. 

Purascharana, is a performance of Japa before (Purah) 
beginning to concentrate ( Upasana ) on the Mantra, and 
after the Dlksha (vow). The method of practising it 
(Japa) consists of the five states (Avasthas), the six 
Snnyas (void), the seven Vishuvas (absorptions) and the 
nine Chakras. We have dealt with it in detail in the first 
part of the Varivasyarahasya. 8 


1 The six kinds of Nyasas are described in the Yoginlhridaya (III, 14 
to 46). The 51 Ganesas, 9 Grabas, 27 Nakshatras, 7 Yogiais, 12 Basis 
and 51 Pithas with their respective colours and weapons, etc., should 
be meditated upon as the presiding deities of certain parts of the 

body. 

3 This was printed by me some years back but the copies are 

exhausted. 

3 The five Avasthas are (I, 39 to 42) waking, dreaming, sound slefep, 

the fourth, and fifth states. The six Sunyas are described in verses 

1—44. (Vide Theosophist, Vol. 19, page 371). The seven Vishuvas 

are—I, 46 to 5:1—(1) Prana, (2) Mantra, (3) Nudilca, (4) Pras’anta, (5) 
Sakti, (6) Kyla, and (7) Tatvavishuva. This seems to be a description 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 11 

6 and 7. In the Homakhanda you have told us the 
things to be used in the Hoina and the method o£ 
performing it; the fundamental identity between 
ChakrarSja, Vidyfi (fifteen-syllabled Mantra), S'rldevj, 
Guru and pupil, has been imparted to us in the 
Rahasyakhanda. In the chapter on prayers (Stotrsj- 
khanda) various sets of prayers have been given. 

Vhakraruja includes all the Chakras beginning from 
the Bindu, nine in number. 1 

Vidya : either the fifteen-syllabled or the sixteen- 
syllabled, mantra, i.e., Panchadasl or Sliodasl. 

’ S'rldevl • the goddess Tripurasundarl. 

Identity ( Tadhtmya) : all of them are Brahman. Bh. 
Gita 17, 23 says : “ Om, Tat and Sat are the threefold 
designations of Brahman.” Hence all of them 2 are with 
Brahman*. The method of this identification has been 
dealt with by us in the Varivasyfirahasya (II). 

Various sets : Panchami Stavarfija and other prayers. 

8. The thousand names of the goddesses MantrinI and 
Dandinl have been told me, but those of Devi LalitS, have 
not been told me. 

MantrinI a minister, helps one in ruling a Kingdom, 
and in the Tantras she is called Rajasyamala. 

Dandinl helps one to control (enemies or senses), and 
in the Tantras she is called Varahl. 


of one’s experience when one identifies oneself with these seven. 
Sloka 53 says it is called Tatoaviskuva because it is the state in which 
ones identifies himself with the Atman. Verse 54 says Japa means 
the repetition of a Mautra by the process described above. Vide 
the Yoginihridaya, III, 182 to 197. 

1 The names of the nine Chakras as given in the Yoginihridaya (I, 
83*to 85) are as follows : Trailokya Mohana, the Sarvasaparip&ralca, 
Sarva Samkshohhana, Sarvasaubh&gyaddyaka Saroarthasadhaka, Sarva- 
rajcshakara, Sarvaroyahara, Sarvasiddhimaya, and Sarvmiandamaya 

2 Srlchakra, Mantra, Devi, Guru and the Student. ^ 






12 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


9. 0 Hayagriva, thou oeean of mercy, on this point 
doubt has arisen in me ; have yon forgotten it or knowingly 
neglected if ? 

10. Or, is it because that I am unworthy to hear the 
thousand names ? Tell me the reason why you have omitted 
this. 

There might be four possible reasons why the thousand 
names were not imparted. First, the forgetfulness of the 
teacher. This is not the reason, because, as Hayagriva is 
endowed with omniscience, he cannot forget it. Second, 
the indifference of the teacher ; this is not the reason, 
because in the four relationships, vis., those of friend, 
enemy, servant, and indifferent persons, that of pupil is 
included under that of servant, and he cannot be regarded 
with indifference; because if so, the teacher would no 
longer possess the attribute of compassion. The third 
reason is the unworthiness of the pupil. This cannot be 
the reason, for the Guru himself imparts to the pupil 
fitness to receive knowledge. For, the Bodhasira says 
“ The holy Guru imparts the lotus quality to the flower 
which is no lotus ( i.e ., imparts wisdom to the student who 
otherwise could never obtain it) by declaring the Vedanta 
doctrines of discrimination and dispassion. Thus, like the 
Guru, the sun causes the lotus to bloom. Hence every 
effort should be made to approach the Guru who is the 
sun.” 

The fourth reason is that the knowledge is secret, as 
stated in verse 13. 

Suta said : 

11. Thus questioned by the holy, pot-born one, 
(Kumbhasambhava), Hayagriva greatly delighted, addressed 
the ascetic Kumbhasambhava thus : 

The Bharata prohibits it: “ Not questioned, to no one 
should it^be imparted. Thus (is) the ordinance of the 



I*AHTA SAHASRANAMA 


13 


Vedas.” Again, the second part of the same sanctions it: 
“ Even if not questioned, one may impart (wisdom) to a 
student, if he (the Guru) is not in return repelled.” This 
is intended for a student who has faith, but is unable to 
question. For, it is said that if one has no faith, there 
is a great loss to him. Baudhayana says, “ Faithlessness is 
a great sin, and faith indeed is a great Tapas. Therefore 
the gods do not partake of the oblations offered without 
faith. Whether he performs sacrifices, or gives gifts, that 
fool never goes to heaven. He whose conduct is doubtful, 
and who acts according to his own whim and against the 
scriptures, is called a fool, because he violates all the 
principles of the Dharmas.” The S'ruti also says “By 
faith, the fire is kindled, by faith the oblation is offered, 
etc.” The meaning is even if one questions, who is without 
faith, to him the knowledge should not be imparted. Why 
then about the non-questioner? If a student is unable to 
put questions, but has full faith, in such cases, without 
expecting questions, the Guru can impart knowledge. But 
here Agaslya has faith and the power to put questions. 
Such being the case, why did he not put me the question, 
thought, the holy Hayagrlva, the prince of teachers, who 
was much taken by the services of the student and wanted 
to instruct him. But fearing the injunction, ‘not asked, 
not to be given,’ he was much pained at the delay of the 
student in questioning him with devotion. The instruction 
of the thousand names, was therefore withheld from him 
till he asked. 

Ascetic : (Tapasa) Agastya has in him that faith which 
gave him the thirst for knowledge, which comes only after 
annihilating the sins by the performance of YCiga, etc. 

Kumbhasambhava means one who has long practised 
Kumbhaka, the third stage of PrSnSySma, and a means to 
restrain the fleeting modifications of the mind. Moreover, 
Rechaka and Pflraka (expiration and inspiration) may easily 
be practised by all, but not so the Kumbhaka. 



14 


LAL1TA SAHASKANAMA 


As Agastya is a worshipper of Devi the;||0Po 
instructs him in this hymn. If one has faith and devotion, 
but does not worship the Vidyii, according to the.SfSfSfct'as 
the Guru who imparts it to him will meet with the curse of 
Yoginl. 

12. Hayagrlva said : 

Oh Agastya, husband of Lopamudril, listen with con¬ 
centrated mind. I shall tell you why I did not instruct 
< you in the thousand names. 

Lopamudra : the wife of Agastya ; she is known as a 
model wife who devoutly worships The goddess to whom 
her husband devotes his life. Being the husband Of 
Lopamudra is thus a special qualification or attribute of 
Agastya. Devi herself says in Tris’ati. (I, 15) : “ His 
wife LopStnudra worships me with devotion ; and he too is 
extremely devoted to me. So you may instruct him.” 

Lopamudra may also be the name of a Mantra, or, 
another name for Tripurasundarl. In this case the Sanskrit 
word for husband, pali, should be taken to mean 
‘ worshipper.’ 1 

13. I did not tell you (that) because I thought it was 
a secret, and for no other (reason) ; as you have now asked 
me with devotion I shall impart to you that. 

14. The Teacher may impart even a secret to a student 
who is possessed of devotion ; but it shall never be taught 
by you to one who has no Bhakti (devotion) ; 

One who has no devotion : to one such, even should he 
ask for it, it should not be taught; but to the devoted, to 
the man of Bhakti, even without his asking for it, it may 
be taught. 


' There is a discussiou in the commentary about the Lopamudra 
Mantra, which I have dropped in the translation. 



LALITA SAHASHANAMA 15 

15. Never to a rogue, to a wicked man; nor at any 
time to One who is devoid of faith. But to one who is 
thoroughly devoted to the Divine Mother, to one who 
understands the Royal Science ; 

The S'ruti says 1 : “ Science approached a Brahmana and 
said to him Conceal me, I am your treasure. Do not 
make me over to one who is envious or crooked-minded, 
nor to a rogue. So kept, my virtue endures.” 

j Rogue : one who, though conscious that his eyes were 
opened by the Teacher, is yet unwilling to own the fact, 
and himself takes credit for knowledge so gained, or 
pretends not to recognise it. 

Wicked man : one who tells his Teacher that he is 
convinced (of the truth and value of the teachings), but 
abuses him afterwards ; one whose heart is not pure. 

Faith: the belief that what the Teacher says is 
supreme truth. The Bhakti-Tantra says (S'Sndilya S'fitra, 
I, 2) : “ The highest devotion to Is vara (is called) that 
(Bhakti) ”. 

Royal Science : (Vidyarajaj ; the Panchada?i Mantra. 
This should be learned from a Guru. 

16 and 17. To a worshipper (UpAsaka) who is pure 
you may impart the thousand names. The Goddess Lalita 
has many thousands of ever powerful names ’ in the Tantras ; 
but this set of thousand, 0 Sage, is the first and the best. 
Srlvidya is the first of all the Mantras, and in it the Kadi 
is the first and the best. 

Upasaka : one who daily performs both the compul¬ 
sory and the optional (Nitya and Naimityaka) rites and in 


1 Manu, II, 114 ; and Nirukta, II, 4. 

5 Devi has not only a thousand names bat several sets of names 
each consisting of a thousand. This treatise reveals one particular 
set of thousand names as the best. 



16 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


doing so, practises the mental action of realising the 
undividedness of Devi in all. 

Pure : free form dishonesty and villainy, etc. 

Many thousand names : of the many millions of 
thousands, only ten sets of thousand names are selected ; 
these are indicated by the first letters of each set of one 
thousand, viz.. Gam, Gd, Syd, La, Kd, Bd, La, Ret, Sa, 
BM, (vide Chap. Ill—70, com.) 

Tantras : There are many thousands of names in the 
sixty-four Agamas 1 as also in the Puranas. 

Mantra : The difference between Mantra and Vidyd 
is that the former has reference to male deities and the 
latter to female ones. To show the identity of S'iva with 
S'akti, the word Fid yd is here used along with the word 
Mantra. Hence permission is given to meditate thus on 
Devi. It is said “ One may meditate upon Devi, as male or 
female, or as existence, knowledge, and bliss (.Sat, Chit, and 
A-nanda) without attributes.” The Malamantra also refers 
to names in both genders, hence we find in this set of 
thousand names words of all genders as Gunanidhi (Mas.), 
Srlmilts (Fern.), Paramjyotih (nen.) ; or the word 
Mantrdndm is used in the plural to show that though 
composed of three groups ( Katas) it (Panchadasrl Mantra) 
is formed of fifteen letters. 

Mantras are of five kinds, viz., Pinda, Kartari, Bfja, 
Mantra and Maid. The Nityfttantra says “ A mono-syllable 
Mantra is named Pinda ; a two-syllabled one Kartari ; 
a Mantra having three to nine syllables is called Blja ; one 
with ten to twenty-syllables is known as Mantra ; and 
Mantras with more than twenty-syllables are called Maids ; 
without any further distinction.” Here (in the Text) the 
fifteen-syllabled Mantra is rightly called “ a Mantra ” ; 
hence the use of the word. 


1 Vide Lakshmidhara’s commentary on “ Saundaryalahari," 
Sloka 31. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 17 

Kadi ; that which has Ka at the beginning ; or, it 
may refer to S'akti mentioned in Tantraraja as Kali. In’ 
that work Siva says to Devi : “ The syllable Ka is in thy 
form, and that S'akti confers, all miraculous powers 
(Siddhis ).” The Sruti (the Tripuropanishad, No. 82) 
says : “ The Mantra of the ancient Vidya, the mother of 
the universe, is composed of the letters indicated by the 
following words, Kama, Yoni, Kamala, Vajrapani, Ouha, 
Hasa, Matarifva, Abhra, Indra, Ouha, Sakala and Maya." 
According to the rules called Sarvaveddntapratyaya 
although all the Vidyas arising out of the Vedas are one 
and the same, still they differ according to the intellectual 
Capacities of the devotees ( Vpdsakas). 

The Kadi-vidya is said to be the best {Para) because 
in the other Vidyas all the thirty-seven letters, indicating 
the thirty-six tatvas and the one (Brahman) above them, 
are not consistent. 

These points are dealt with by us in the Varivasya- 
rahasya {vide II, 26). It is said in that work : “ The 
pure Vidyd {Kadi) is that whose body is indicated 
by- the vowels, the consonants, the three Bindus, the 
three Nodas, and which is in the form of the thirty- 
six tatvas and the one that transcends them.” 1 2 3 Moreover 
the following secret meaning, and many other similar 
things which must be obtained from a Guru, are not 
consistent with the Hadividya. “ Even when one syllable 
of (Her) mantra (which consists of a number of syllables) 
is well obtained (by a person), he is envied by Ravi, 


1 Vide the Vedanta SDtras of VySsa. The SDtra III—3—1 says : 
“ The cognitions intimated by all the VedSnta-texts are identical on 
account of the non-difference of injunction and so on.” “ Sacred 
Books of the East,” Vol. 38, page 184. 

2 The 36 Tatvas, according to the Sakta?, are STva, S'akti, S'adfis’iva, 
Isvara, Suddha vidya, Maya, Kala, Kali, Vidya, Raga, Niyati. 

Purnsha, Prakriti, Ahankara, Buddhi, Manas, 6 Juana and 5 
Karmendriyas, 5 Tanmitrae, and 5 Mahabhiitas. 




18 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Garuda, Indu. Kandarpa, S'ankara, Anala and Vishnu.” 
(Sethubhandha, I, 3.) 1 

“The eleventh syllable ( Ekara ) of her (Mantra) which 
is shaped like, a triangle is even now seen as the support 
and the seed of the Universe from the mundane egg to the 
infinite space.” I. 6. a 

Some say that the Smti (Rig-veda, V, 47—4) which 
says “ It consists of four 1ms (f»^) and confers benefit ” is 
consistent only with the K&dividya ; but the secret 
meaning is that it (the meaning of the Smti) applies 
equally well to the H&dividyQ,. Again, the Tripur&tSpinT 
Up. (No. 80) says : “ Now we shall describe the most 
secret part of that (Vidyfl).” Then it proceeds to prove’ 
the identity of the Gayatrl with the Panchadasl Mantra ; 
and states that the word Tat (the first word of the Gayatrl) 
is synonymous with Ka (the first word of the Panthadasl) ; 
and so the identity of the other words is explained. 


1 Comm. 1. Ravi, (the sun god) envies because he is the only great 
luminary, the object of meditation, a id the stimulator of all actions. 


2. Garuda. Who has the power of carrying the weight of all- 
pervading Vishnu, is the remover of poison, and has the quickness 
of flight, etc. 

3. hidn. (Moon) who satisfies all gods, nourishes all plauts, and 
causes pleasure in every one, etc. 

4. Kandarpa. (The god of love.) Who agitates all minds and 
eau be invisible and is known for his beauty, etc. 

5. Sankara. The lord of all knowledge, who is above the Universe 
and is worshipped by all, etc. 

^ 6. Anala. (The god of fire) who is in the digestive organ of all 
sentient, beings, who carries the oblations (to the gods) and is the 
consumer of everything, etc. 

7. And Vishnu, the protector of the universe, the husband of 
Lakshml and the possessor of Maya, etc. 

2 Comm. In the Nagarl Script Ekara was written exactly like 
a triangle by the followers of tradition. A is the supreme 
Shva, I (f) is Devi, his consort. The union of Siva and Devi 
(Ekara) is the basis and seed of the manifestation of the Universe. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 19 

In the Trisfati too we, find the same respect shown to it 
(Kadividya) by Kames’vara and his consort. But in 
TantrarSja, the third of the three groups (Kutas of this 
Mantra) is read first, and in this there is one additional 
syllable, which is not in the others. This might have 
been added for the sake of the facility of utterance. This 
means Hodividyd only. This was promulgated after 
Kadividya as the above Up. (No. SO) tells us. The 
Slokas in Sanndarvalaharl (32 and 33) may be explained 
as belonging to either Kadi or Kadi. , 

18. Just as Sripura among cities is the best, so is 
Lalita among the Saktis, and the supreme S^iva among the 
devotees of Srlvidya ; 

S'ira. The highest result of meditation ( Updsana) is 
the identity (non-distinction) with the thing meditated upon. 
This identity exists always in Paramas'iva. How otherwise 
can he (Siva) be the first of Gurus (Adinatha) ? For, how 
is that realisation of identity attained by us and others ? 

The secret of the established doctrine is that the 
student attains realisation of Unity with Devi through the 
Guru alone, by identifying himself >vith the Guru who has 
attained identity with Devi by the stability of his power of 
realising that identity. 

Supreme S'iva : This excludes Rudra and other gods 
with qualities. 

19 and 20. So among the various thousands, this is the 
most excellent. Devi LalitUmba is not so much pleased 
with the recitation of any other set of thousand names as 
with this. Therefore to gain the Divine Mother's favour, 
one should repeat this continually. 

Recitation : uttering vocally and mentally. 

Continually : it means that this repetition is to be 
continued daily like the performance of Agnibotra, compul¬ 
sorily and obligatarily. 



20 


LALITA BAHA8HANAMA 


21. With him who worships Mother LalitS, placing 
her in the ChakrarSja (Sfrlchakra) offering bilva leaves, 
lotuses, or tulasis reciting the thousand names. 

22. With him the ruler on the lion-throne ( Simhtisana ) 
at once becomes pleased. When he has worshipped the 
Chakraraja, he should recite the fifteen-syllabled Mantra. 

23. And at the end of the Japa repeat these thousand 
names. If he is unable to perform the Japa, Pujft, etc., he 
should read these thousand names. 

24. He will thus obtain as much merit as if he per¬ 
formed the worship and the Japa in detail. In worship-; 
ping Her he may repeat other hymns (Stotras) also ; for 
they confer merit on him. 

In detail ( Sdnga ) : piija consists of the rites beginning 
with Avaranap'ija and ending with the worship of the 
chief deity ; the repetition of mantra with the Kulluka, 
Setu, and Maha Setu (the different kinds of pronunciation 
of the syllable 0m), and Nydsa, etc. 

Other Hymns : There are many hymns such as 
Trailokya moluina, Kavacha, etc. 

25. He should repeat these thousand names as a daily 
duty; the worship of the Srlchakra, the Japa, and the 
recitation of the thousand names of DevJ 

26. Should be performed strictly by a devotee; the 
rest is said to be (performed) for (the sake of) prosperity; ‘ 
but the repetition of the thousand names is imperative to a 
devotee (BhaJtd). 

27. I will tell you the reason of it, listen, 0 pot-born 
one. Once Devi Lalita,, intending to do good to her 
devotees 

1 Because such performances depend on whether one desires 
prosperity or not. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 21 

28. Called the goddesses headed by Vas'inl, the goddess 
of speech, and others, and addressed them thus. Devi said : 
0) ve goddesses Vjlgdevl, Vasinl and others mark my 
words. 

Vas'inl and others. The seven goddesses from Karne i~ 
varl to Kaulinl. * 

29. Your splendid power of speech is derived from my 

grace; you were deputed (by me) to confer the power of 
speech on my devotees. * 

There are many other S'aktis (goddesses), Nakuli and 
others, whose power of speech is also derived from the 
grace of Devi; but they are deputed to the work of 
stopping the speech, and other actions of those who quarrel 
with the devotees of LalitS. Hence the statement Vas'inl 
and others . 

30. You know the secret of my Chakra, and you are 
wholly devoted to my names ; so I command you to compose 
hymns to me. 

The secret of my Chakra. There are many prayers 
like the present one, composed by Vas'inl and others ; then, 
why this one ? Because in the other hymns the secret of 
the Chakra is not revealed. Chakra is the space from the 
centre (Bindu) to the outer lines (Bhupura). This is the 
Vasana 1 body of Devi. 

Or, Chakra means the endless aggregate of the varied 
powers ( S'aktis ) belonging to the states of consciousness 
{Turlya). This Turlya state is the complete idea of‘I,’ 
(Pnrnahctmbhaua) suddenly arisen like a flash of light, as a 
modification of one’s own consciousness shining in itself 
( Samvit ), otherwise called Vimarga or manifested. The 
mental meditation upon these powers ( S’aktis ) can only be 


1 Vasatta, the mental form, is said to be the third and supreme 
body of Devi. Vide the commentary on the 8th name. 



22 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


learned from a Gnrn. Hence it is called secret. When one 
attains the above state he draws every thing except himself 
into himself. The Siva S'fltras 1 (I—6) say, “ When one 
meditates on the S'aktichakru the universe is drawn into 
him ; and (II—6) the Guru is the means.” 

Wholly devoted. (The commentator here questions :) 
As there are already many Upanishads, viz., Aruna, 
Guhyakn, Tripura, and others which treat of the S’richakra, 
what is the use of composing a new hymn ? The answer is, 
that the names igven in this Saha grandma not only contain 
the ordinary meaning of each name, but they are arranged 
in such a manner as to include many other meanings, such 
as those of Chakra, Mantra', etc. For this reason Devi 
entrusted this composition to Vasin! and others. 

31. Compose a prayer adorned with my thousand 
names, so that, thus praised by the devotees, I may at once 
become extremely delighted. 

Adorned or marked ( Ankita ). The special name, 
Lalita should be used at the end of the book and at the end 
of the thousand names in order to avoid other names such 
as BhavAni, etc., which belong to the consorts of the quali¬ 
fied Rudra and other deities. 

HayagrIva Said : 

32. Thus ordered by the words of the Divine Mother, 
Lalita, the goddesses composed this excellent prayer of the 
secret names of Devi. 

Secret. Because these thousand names contain the 
secret of Chakra, and of Mantra. 

33. Hence it is well known as the thousand secret 
names (Rahasya Nftma SAhasra). Once upon a time, the 
Mother sitting on her lion-throne 

1 The Siva Sutras with northern commentaries are published in the 
Kashmeri Series. 



LALITA S AH ASK AN AM A 


23 


34. Gave audience to all, 0, pot-born one; and to 
worship her there came crores of Brahmas with Brahmams 
(their consorts). 

Brahmanls : Brahma + ana ; Brahma means Vedas 
and ana to repeat, i.e., the repeater of the four Vedas by 
his four mouths ; and his consort is named Brahm&ril. 
The Svachchanda Sastra says concerning the word 
‘ Brahmdni is another S'akti dwelling on the lap of 
Brahma,’ or she gives life (ana) to Brahma. In the Rudraya- 
mala in the Sarvamangala Dhyana chaptfe, it is said that 
she is attended by crores of BrahmanIS with Brahmas. 

35. Also there came crores of NarUyanas with Lakshmis, 
crores of Rudras with crores of Gaurls. 

Crores of NtXrayanas. There are endless Universes 
(Brahmdnda s) like ours, all co-existing ; and each having 
a Brahma, *Vishnu, and Rudra, for its creation, preserva¬ 
tion, and destruction ; all these were assembled at the same 
time. This shows that Devi is ruler of all the Universes 
(Brahmandas). 

36. The different Saktis such as Mantrinl, and Dandinl, 
who came to do her reverence, were innumerable. 

The different S'aktis. The Rudrayamala and other 
books mention, “ ParSs'akti Adis'akti, Ichcha, Jn'ma, Kriya, 
Bala Bala, Annapurna, Bagala, Tara, Vagvadini, Para, 
Gayatrl, Savitrl, Siddhalakshml, Svayamvara, Nakull, 
Turagarfldha, Kurukulla, Renuka, Sampatkarl, Samrajya- 
lakshmt, Padmavatl, S'iva, Durga, Bhadrakriti, Kali, 
Kalaratrl, Subhadrika, Chchinnamasta, Bhadrakall, Kalar 
khandl and Sarasvatl and many others.” 

Innumerable. Because there are many S'aktis included 
under each name of a S'akti. 

37. There were also a multitude of Devas, a multitude 
of men, and a multitude of Siddhas ; and Devi Lalita 
allowed herself to be seen by them all. 



24 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


A multitude of Devos (Divyaugka) the holy Brahma- 
rishis, Visvamitra, etc. The Siddhas are Sanaka, Nftrada 
and other Yogins. The Rudrayamala says, “ Devi was 
attended by many crores of rulers of Qaarters, by many 
•crores of Moons, Suns and Vasus, by many crores of 
Yogins such as Sanaka, and by many Saptarishis 1 and by 
many NSradas.” 2 Or, the word Ogha (multitude) of Devas, 
men, and Siddhas, may mean the different assemblies of 
Gurus. For there are seven Gurus of Gurus (Paramagurus) 
headed by Par^prakSa'anandanStha, eight Paraparagurus 
headed by Gagananandanatha, and four Apara Gurus 
headed by Bhoganandanatha. These three assemblies of 
Gurus are indicated by the words Devas, men, and Siddhas 
respectively. The above explanation follows the view of 
the followers of Kctmar&ja, but according to the School of 
Lop&mudrO,, and according to the divisions of Vidylls, as 
described in the Jnanarnava, etc., there are many groups of 
Gurus headed respectively by Mis'ranandanatha and others. 
The gradations among the Gurus can only be learned 
through the instructions of a Guru. 

By them all : (Sarva). Sarva is the 8th numeral from 
the Parardha (which is the 18th numeral. 8 ) 

38. When these had worshipped her, they took their 
respective seats ; then, directed by the glance of SrldevI 
Lalita. 

Respective seats : The Yis'vakarma S'astra says, “ On the 
Tight of the King should sit his sons ; on the left his 
eight ministers,” and so on. 


1 The seven stars are supposed to be the seven great Rishis, vis., 
Marlchi, Atri, Augiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and Vasishtha. 

2 There is a discussion about the name3 of numerals of one, ten, 
etc., which is dropped in the translation. 

3 The numerals are 1-10-100, etc., and I have dropped the transla¬ 
tion of the numerals which, are mentioned in Y&yu Pr., Ramayans 
and Yajurveda. 



TftiVANDSuM fuauc LiiiKfcitt. ' 

LA LIT A SAHASRAKAMA 25 

39. Vasin!, and others, rising (from their seats, with 
folded hands, praised the Mother, Lalita, singing the 
thousand names composed by themselves, 

40. The great ruler, Lalita, became glad on hearing 
this hymn ( Stava ) ; and all those that were assembled there 
were amazed. 

Amazed, in other lists of thousand names, e.g., 
Vishnusahasranama (the book containing the thousand 
names of Vishnu) and others, we find the use of many- 
meaningless particles such as Eva, cha, etc. In some places 
many names are repeated two, three or four times. Though . 
the venerable commentators on these names have given 
different meanings to these repeated names, still the fault 
of repetition is plain enough. But this set of thousand has '■ 
no such faults. Each name contains the secret of the 
chakras, df the mantras and has many secret meanings 
besides the ordinary one. Though these secret meanings 
can only be learned from a teacher, yet we shall give some 
of them in order to gladden the'hearts of the wise. 

41. Then Lalita addressed the assembly of the Gods 
and said : The goddesses of speech composed this incom¬ 
parable hymn at my command. 

42. It is adorned (marked) with many of my divine 
names, which are pleasing to me. Therefore recite always 
this prayer and thus increase my gladness. 

43. Declare these thousand names to my devotees.. 
These thousand names of mine, if a devotee recites even 
once 


Devotee, one who has been initiated into SYlvidyS. 

44. He should be known as most dear to me, and I 
grant him all that he desires. Having worshipped me in 
the Srlchakra, and having recited the Panchadas'flkshari 




26 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


45. One should repeat these thousand names to please 
me. Whether he worships me (in Srlchakra), or not, 
whether he performs the Japa, (of Panchadatfl) or not 

46. If he but always recites these thousand names to 
please me, without doubt he will obtain all his desires by 
my grace. 

47. Therefore always recite these my thonsand names 
with reverence. Hayagrlva said : Thus the Ruler, Lalitfl, 
commands the Devas and their followers. 

Commands : the present tense is used to show that the 
wish (Icfichd) of Devi, which is also termed Sasa&a 
(ordinance) and Ajna (command), is eternal. 

48. From that time, at her command, Brahma, Vishnu, 
Mahes'vara, and the Saktis, viz., Mantrinl and others 

49. Ever recite with devotion these thousand names to 
gain the grace of Lalita. Therefore, 0 Sage, the devotees 
must indeed rccito this. 

50. 0 Lord of Sages, I have already told you why 
this recitation is necessary; listen, then, with devotion, 
while I repeat the thousand names. 

Thus ends the first and introductory chapter of the 
Lalitasahasranama in the Uttar a Khanda of the Brahmanda 
Purana in the dialogue between Hayagriva and Agastya. 

The Nyasa 

• In this Mala Mantra of the thousand names of Lalita, 
one should bow down to the Rishis, to'Vas'inl and the other 
goddesses of" speech (and meditate upop them) in the head, 
to the Anushtub: metre in the mouth ; to the Devata, the 
great Tripurasundari in the heart; to Blja... in the 
navel ; to 8akti in the Adhara ; to Kllaka in the feet. The 
object of Japa is to attain the four objects of human desires 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


27 


(Purusharthas). Ny&sa : For it is said “ The Rishi should 
be meditated upon as in the head because he is the Guru 
(the Seer of the Mantra) ; the Devata as in the heart, 
because the deity is to be meditated upon in the heart 
alone ; as the metre consists of letters it should be meditated 
upon as in the tongue. In this way the deities should 
be meditated upon in their proper places by those well 
versed in the Mantras'astra. ” The proper places at which 
the Rishis should be meditated upon are mentioned in the 
Prapanchasara (of S'rl S'ankaracharya). The NyOsa varies 
with the S'aivas, S'aktas, and others. These are described in 
the Padarthadarsa. 1 * As we have already explained these in 
connection with Japa in our other work, Varivasyarahasya 
(II, 107), we omit the details here. 

Dhyana Si.oka 3 * 5 

One should meditate upon the supreme Mother, as 
reddish like the Sindfira powder, three-eyed, with the moon 
as her crest jewel shining above her crown of gems, with a 
smiling countenance and large breasts. In her two hands 
she bears a red lotus flower, and a gem-bedecked vessel 
above which bees hum. She is of a pleasant countenance 
and her red feet rest on a vase decked with precious stones. 

Thus ends the first Kala called Tapinl’ in the com¬ 
mentary named Saubh&gyabhaskara composed by Bhasura- 
nanda, as” explained by the verses of the Introductory 
chapter, and by four verses of Paribhash&s (of his Guru) 
already referred to. 


1 The commentary on the S'aradStilaka by Raghava Bhatta. 

* The verse describing the goddess in the form in which she should 

be meditated upon. This is recited after the Nyasa and before 

commencing the Mantra. 

5 The book is divided into twelve chapters according to the divisions 
of the twelve Kal&s. In the thousand names, every hundred is 
grouped into a Kala, and the introductory chapter and the Phalasruti 
chapter at the end are added, thus making twelve Kal&s'. 



28 


LALl 


8AHA8RANAMA 


The Commentator’s Introduction to the Second 
Chapter 

Now (the author) of the forty ParibhashS verses proceeds 
to explain that 32 letters were selected to begin the names 
(of this SahasranSina) from the 51 alphabets. 

V. “Amongst the (16) vowels l—5 were taken (i.e., 

3T, 3?r, ?, f and 3) the next 5 (i.e., % % 55, 5£) the 12th 

(\) the 14th (sft) and the 16th (M:), 9 and5. in fra—group, 
H and | in the cha group, 1, 2, 4 and 5 in the Ta group, sj 
and 95 in Ta and Pa groups, respectively and 3 in the 
last Pa-group are left out.” " 

Thus amongst 51 alphabets 32 are selected and 19 are 
rejected. 1 Hence the S'flta S'amhita says (IV, 47.) 

“I adore her, the Supreme of the Supremest, who 
has divided herself into 32 letters.” 

VI. We will give out the names beginning with this 
selected 32 Letters in order. The names beginning with 
31 are 40 ; with 3TT10 ; with % 3 ; with f 2 ; with 3 5 ; with 
tr 1 ; with art 2 ; with 3j 4 ; with 81 ; with 1 ; with *J 
24 ; with =9 29. 

VII. With 3 1 ; with 51 19 ; with 3 2 ; with 5T 46 ; with 

9 37 ; with 9 14 ; with 9 75 ; with 9 81 ; with 9 24 ; with 

37 ; with H 112 ; with 9 13 ; with < 38 ; with 5514 ; with 

^ 79 ; with 5T 59 ; with g 5 ; with H 122 ; with if 11 ; and 

with SJ 9. 

VIII. Thus the thousand names were explained for the 
benefit of aspirants, on the basis of the innumerable 


1 The Science showing the potency and virtues of the letters says 
that the selected 32 letters for the beginning of this SahasranAma are 
good and the rejected 19 letters are bad. This indicates according 
to Nrisimha, the author of the Paribhashas, that the compiler of 
this hymn had great responsibility in selecting auspicious letters for 
the beginning of the 1,000 names of this collection. 



LALITA SAHASRAKAMA 29 

qualities and actions and the real and apparent manifest¬ 
ations of the omnipresent Devi. 

Benefit: those who want to propitiate the presiding 
deities of the 51 letters from ai to SjT from apjcTT^q&ft to 
respectively, and also those who want to become 
free from sins by a mere knowledge of the names of the 
letters with their respective deities. 

Action a, etc : Brahman is of two kinds, ‘ with parts ’ 
( Sakala ) and ‘ without parts ’ ( Nishkala ). The S'ruti (Mun. 
Up., 1—4) says : “Two kinds of Brahman are to be known, 
the Supreme ( Para ) and the ordinary (Apara).” This is 
repeated in the Smritis alsg. ‘ With parts ’ is the ordinary 
f Apara ) aspect (of Brahman). It is of two kinds, one 
being the ruler of the Universe, and the other the Universe 
itself ; it is said “ for He is the ruler of the Universe and 
the Universe itself.” Again, in another place, it is said 
“S'iva is the doer, Siva is the enjoyer, Siva is all this 
Universe. Devi is the giver, and the enjoyer, and Devi is all 
this universe ”. “ He is the cause of the creation and destruc¬ 
tion of the Universe and he. is the Universe itself.” The 
Srutialso (Tai.-Up., II—6.), “He desired ■ may I be many 
The word desired indicates the instrumental cause (Nimit- 
takamna) of Brahman, and may"I be indicates the material 
cause ( Parindmak&rana ). This view is supported by 
Vyasa in his Vedanta Sfltra (I, IV, 23) : “ Brahman is the 
material cause also, this view not being in conflict with the 
promissory statements and the illustrative instances.” 1 
Brahman as the Universe is of two kinds : mobile and 
immobile. These two are again divided into (1) Hiranya- 
garbha and others (divine beings), (2.) men and others 
(animals). The ruler of the Universe is also manifold on 
account of his functions of creation, preservation, destruc¬ 
tion, disappearance, and beneficence, as Brahm-5, Vishnu, 
Rudra, etc. ; and the forms of these are endless, as each one 


1 Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 34, page 283. 



30 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


of them, desiring to bless his devotees, assumes many other 
forms according to the conception 1 ( VOsana) of his 
devotees, and according to the actions (to be performed). 
Thus the forms are endless. The Suprabheda says : “ By 
his Maya He takes many forms for the sake of meditation 
and worship by ascetics, Munis, Jnanis, and Yogins.” 
The Kalika Pr. also says : " The one only Mays (Devi) 
assumes manifold forms such as Kamila, Sarasvatl cor¬ 
responding to the different functions of beings ; she is 
S'avitri and Sandhya.” Br. Naradiya Pr. also says,referring 
to S'akti, the cause of the Universe : “ Some say she is 
Uma, others call her LakshmL; and others again say that 
she is Bharatl; Girijt, Ambika,T>urga, Bhadrakali, Chandl, 
Mahes'varl, Kaumari, Yaishnavl, Varahl, BrahmT, Vidya, 
Avidya, Maya, Prakriti and Para. Thus say the great 
Pish is.” Again the S'ruti (Brahmabindu Up., 12) says, 
“She is seen as one, and as many, like the, moon in 
(different sheets of) water.” Devi Pr. says : “ O wise one, 
this is the established doctrine concerning Devi; she is the 
Vedas, the sacrifices, the heaven and all this Universe ; the 
Universe, immovable as well as movable, is pervaded by 
Devi. She is all that is sacrificed to and worshipped by 
the Devas ; and She is alPthat is food and drink ; manifold 
in form and name, Devi is everywhere—in trees, in the 
earth, in the air, in the ether, in water, and in fire.” 

Brahman without parts ( Nnhkala ) is one only. All this 
is well explained to Himavat by Devi in the Karma Pr. “ If 
you are unable to meditate upon my Eternal and Supreme 
form, fix your attention on my qualified form ( Sakalarnpa ), 
and this, which js infinitely changeable with time and 
circumstance, can be grasped by the mind. Whatever form 
of mine your mind is capable of grasping, meditate upon 
that, O father, identifying yourself with that, worship 


1 Conception or mental form (Vasana). The deity appears in a 
form corresponding to the conception of the worshipper. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


31 


it. But my Nishkala form, bare consciousness, pure and 
calm, freed from all attributes, one only, eternal and 
supreme ; that supreme abode can only be attained through 
knowledge Unarm) and with great difficulty.” This being 
so, you will find that different names are applied directly 
without contradiction to the qualified Brahman, because it 
contains all the qualities attributed to it. With reference to 
the unqualified Brahman ( Nirguna ), all epithets (Sabdas) are 
applied indirectly, as there exists the relation of similarity 
(.Tod&tmya) between the qualified and unqualified Brahman. 
In the unconditioned Brahman though the relationship is 
of an illusory nature thei^ exists that quality in Brahman 
which makes a relationship like that of the pot with its 
past and future. Hence, in the Tris'ati (names, 72 and 73) it 
is said, “ Epithets are applied directly and indirectly to Devi 
(in her Saguna and Nirguna aspects).” Hence the epithets 
applied to Devi are endless ; so Hayagrlva (Chap. Ill, 70) 
says : “ 0 pot-born one, crores of thousands of names are 
applied to Devi.” In the Saura Samhita (of SS&nda Pr.) 
Stlrya says to YSjnavSlkya referring to MSya : “It is 
impossible, 0 Sage, for me to enumerate the countless 
names of Devi in a hundred crores of Kalpas.” The Devi 
BhSgavata Pr. also says, “What can I say? Devi has 
countless names, which have been composed by BrahmS 
and other Devatas according to her different qualities and 
doings.” What more do we want ? Brahman itself is Sabda, 
(sound). Hence some names are here used, to correspond 
with the different states of human beings (Jivas), such as, 
‘ she is the Jiva in the waking 1 state ’ (Vis'varOpS, No. 256) ; 
and Taijasa (No. 259), (».«., Devi is the Jiva of the dream¬ 
ing state). Some names signify the attributes of Jiva, such 
as ‘ Malini ’ (stained,' No. 455). Some signify immovable 
things, such as Mahi (earth, No. 718) : some are attributes 
of the qualified Brahman, such as MukundA (one of the 
aspects of Vishnu, (No. 838). Some indicate the different 
1 The meaning is that Devi manifests herself as Visva, etc. 



32 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


aspects of Devi, such as Rama, etc., (No. 313). Some 
denote the actions performed by her in various incarna¬ 
tions, (Avataras) such as fighting with Bhandasura, etc., 
(Nos. 65 to 82). Some denote the unconditioned Brahman, 
such as Paranjyotis (supreme light. No. 808), In this way- 
many other meanings of the names are to be made out. 

Here an objector might say : this particular collection 
consisting of a thousand names is useless, for all words 
( Sdbdas ) in one way or another denote Brahman. The 
answer is, amongst all other names by which, the great men 
of old and the virtuous—the devotees of Devi praised Her 
and attained their ends and fulfilled their desired objects ; 
and these names, Devi declared to be endowed with power, 
and capable of conferring boons ; and they (devotees) 
themselves blessed them (names) ; such names alone are 
collected and arranged into a thousand. Though the same 
is common to all collections of thousands, yet this one is 
superior to the rest and has been accepted by many great 
men, befiuse by it is quickly obtained the reward which 
cannot be gained by the use of oth^r collections of thousand 
names, and for many other reasons. This (superiority, 
etc.), we have already indicated (vide the com. under Sloka 
30 Supra) and shall deal with it again. The Vishnu 
Dharmottara says, “ Hear, 0 first of the twice-born, the 
multitude of the names of the one all-pervading Brahman 
is the means of helping men. According to the objects in 
view the powers are different. By repeating such (names) 
the corresponding results are to be obtained. Whatever 
power belongs to a name, in that sphere alone is it 
effective, whether for good or for evil.” From this it 
■follows : That he who desires food should repeat the name 
“ Annada ” (giver of food, No. 669) ; he who desires 
wealth, the name “ Vasuda ” (the giver of wealth, No. 
670); be who is afraid, “ BhaySvaha ” (the remover of 
fears, No. *121) and he who 1 is imprisoned, “ Bandha- 
mochini ” (the liberator from bondage, N6. 546), etc. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


3B 


The Vaya Pr. thus gives the common effect of all 
names : “ One should repeat Devi’s names in the forest, in 
water, on dry land, in places where fear arises from tigers, 
wild anitaals, or thieves, and in all diseases. That the 
name Devi should be continually repeated when walking, 
sleeping,. ■standing and eating; thus doing, he liberates 
himself from bondage.” The YAmakesvara Tantra 1 says. 
If one aspirant thinks in his mind one single name of 
hers, in that moment he knows the chakra of the Mother, 
O beloved one.” This indicates that mere mental repeti¬ 
tion of her names confers on one the boons e-ven up to the 
knowledge of her chakra. The Kaslkhanda says that by 
repeating a particular name one obtains the corresponding 
result. “ He who drinks the nectar of the word Umti 
while in this mortal life, O Kumbhasambhava, will never 
again suck milk from the breast of his mother. Chitragupta, 
the god of death, O BrAhmana never takes note of him who 
repeats day and night Umd, the two syllabled Mantra, 
though he may have committed sins, etc.” ® 

Here an objector nfiglit say : In the Phala 3 chapter of 
a work it is invariabfy said that one will obtain whatever 
he desires by reading the book in question. Then, what is 
the use of saying that one will be relieved if he repeats a 
certain name, viz., ‘ 0 remover of all diseases ’? Nor can 
we take the above as an ArthavAda (praise), for though we 
have this in the Vedas, we have it not in the PnrAnas, for 
the Br. NAradlya Pr. says, “they who attribute ArthavAda 
to PurAnas, the worst among twice-born ones, their virtues 
also will have the same effect. One who attributes 
ArthavAda to the PurAnas, which are the means of ridding 
oneself of all actions, he, the vilest of creatures, goes to 

hell,” _ ■ __ 

' This is one of the Devi Agamas, and there are four or five com¬ 
mentaries upon it. The MSS. of the text and commentaries are to be 
found in .some of the public libraries. 

3 The concluding Chapter which states the result or reward (phala) 
to be obtained. 



LALITA 8AHASKANAMA 


The answer is that though each name prodaces a 
result corresponding to its specific power, yet it may also 
produce a general result. 1 For the Tantravartika says that 
when a general rule is not clear the special one is followed; 
but the special rule is not to be included under any 
others. Here too we find the same. For, Devi says 
(Supra I, 46), “ One should always repeat these thousand 
names to please me, and by my grace he will undoubtedly 
obtain all his desires.” (This is the general result). Again 
Kalika Pr. says : “ 0, mother of the Universe, those who 
praise you by the words Ambika, Jaganmayi and Maya, 
will obtain all.” In the Vishnu Pr., Vishnu says to Devi, 
“Those who prostrating their bodies praise you by the 
words Maya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Amba, Bhadra, Bhadrakall, 
Kshemya, Kshemankari, in the mornings and evenings will 
obtain all desired objects by my grace.” The same 
is echoed in Yajnavalka Smr : “One should * approach - 
Ambika, the mother of Vinayaka, offering water with grass, 
and Sai4&apa flowers, and pray her “Give me beauty, 
give me fame, give me prosperity, give me children, give 
me wealth, and give me all the desired objects.” The 
Devi Bha. Pr. : “There is not anything which cannot 
be obtained either on earth or heaven, when Devi is 
pleased. They are poor, they are very unfortunate, they 
are much afflicted with many diseases, in whose mind 
there is no faith in the worship of Amba.” Harivamsa 
also says : “ Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Moon, Sun, Fire, Air, 
As'vins, Vasus, Visvedevas, Mahendra, Parjanya, Dhata, 
Earth, ten quarters, cattle, stars, planets, rivers, lakes,, 
oceans, many Vidyadharas, Serpents, Nagas, Eagles, 
groups of Gandharvas, Apsaras, are very pleased where the 
name of Devi is recited.” 2 . 

Thus, according to the Scriptures, any of the names 
of Devi may be repeated, yet if any one desires a particular 


1 Some discussion is omitted here. 

2 A few lines are'omitted here. 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


35 


object to be fulfilled, he must invoke the goddess by the 
corresponding name. So the Sruti (Bri. Up. 4-4-24) also 
says : “ He who knows that Brahman receives food from 
all sides and is the giver of wealth to all, will attain food 
and wealth.” 

In conclusion, if any worshipper invokes Devi by 
any particular name such as “ Annada,” etc., he will soon 
obtain the corresponding result. Hence the Sftta Samhitft 
(IV. 33, 29 and 30) says : “ All names are attributed by his 
own M-5ya (to Brahman) who is himself,the eternal bliss ; 
yet, some names, Such as ‘ S'iva ’ apply Specially (to 
Brahman) by the wish of S'iva himself. 0 sages, by 
repeating the special names one becomes truly the supreme 
Lord himself ; and before one’s lotus like face Sadas'iva 
dances with his consort.” 

IX. Victory attend the first of all mantras, which is 
possessed of qualities, new-footed, fifteen-syllabled, which- 
has a body of three and a half, which is bliss, of ravishing 
beauty, and which is identified with S'iva. & 

Now explaining each name according to the rules laid 
down in the twenty-four Sutras of Chalakshara, the author 
first bows down to his Guru. 

The first of all Mantras. The Guru, the king, is the 
root cause of all mantras: for it is said, “The root of 
salvation is knowledge ; the cause of this is the Lord 
S'iva ; He is attained through the five-syllabled mantra 
(PanehSksharl *)•'; and the speech of the Guru is the root of 
the Mantra.” 

Possessed, of - qualities (Guru). Though in reality the 
Guru is without qualities yet for the sake of the transmis¬ 
sion of knowledge (VidyO) he takes many bodies. 

' New-footed- The two feet of the Guru of two different 
colours, red and white/ It is said, “ I prostrate myself at 

1 Om natriah Sivaya. 

» Red colour signifies Devi and the white S'iva. The two colours 
in the feet signify the identification of these two. 



36 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the feet of the guru which are beyond the senses and the 
mind, which are red and white in colour, and which are 
the unimaginable light of Tripura herself." 

Or, according to the lexicons, charana (foot) means 
“ Purity, wheel, the gate of heaven, and the disc of Vishnu.” 
There are nine wheels (.Chakras) from Trailokyamohana 
to S'arvSnandamaya (see the foot-note on the verses 7 and 8 
supra) and these are not different from the Guru. 1 

Fifteen-syllabled. Panchadast Mantra. 

Three and «„ half. This is KundalinI, which is the 
form of all Devafas and is the body of the Guru. 

Another explanation of the above verse is as follows :— 

The first of all mantras. This is the Pjcanava* 1 
MatrikSkos'a says 2 “The Prana va is circular in form, all- > 
pervading, (.Tara) eternal, and is the first of all mantras?” 
Kalika Pr. says, “ It (any other mantra) is useless unless pre¬ 
ceded and ended by the Prana va.” Sakatayana(Smr.) also says, 
“Gifts, sacrifices, penance, recitation of the Vedas, Japa, 
meditation, the rites performed at the twilights ( Sandhyd ), 
restraint of breath ( Prdndydma ), homa, recitation of 
Mantras to Devas and to the manes, and the beginning of 
Vedas, etc., all these Should be preceded by Om." KatySyana 
(Smr.) also says : “ At the beginning and at the end of the 
recitation of the Vedas, also during Homas, sacrifices, and 
other propitiatory rites, in short, in every religious act 
the Pranava should . be used.” Dalbhyaparisishta says : 
“ Brahmayajna, Japa, Homa, sacrifices to Devas, Rishis, 
and manes are fruitless if performed without the Pranava.” 
Hence S'ruti says : “ All speech is hidden in the Pranava.” 
All speech : all Mantras. 

It may be asked, if the thousand names are Mantras, 
then the addition of Pranava is right; but are the names 
Mantras ? The Tris'ati (I, 27) says, “ 0 pot-born one, you 
1 Some lines are omitted. 

* Explains the letters of the alphabet in Cabalistic diagrams— Vide 
Rajendra Lai Mitra’s MSS. No. 425. 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


37 


must not regard these as simple ordinary names ; but every 
name is a Mantra also.” In another place it is said : “ To 
obtain good fortune the thousand names should be recited as 
Mantra.” Hence the Pranava is necessary at the beginning 
and at the end. 

The tone (Svara ) of Pranava differs according to the 
caste of the Upasaka. The Kalika Pr. says : “ The Udatta 
tone belongs to the Brahmanas ; the anud&tta to Kshatriyas ; 
Prachita or the mental repetition to Vais’yas ; the Pranava 
with the fourteenth Svara called aukdra added with 
Anusvara (the sound of m) and Nada belongs to S'tldras 1 ; 
they can use the Pranava in one or two places (i.e., at the 
beginning’or at the end, or at both places). But the twice- 
born ones should always use the Pranava at both the places. 
In th^Atharvabrahmana the difference in the tones is made 
to depend on the difference in the Vedas ; but since the 
rules of the tones {svara) are for Vedic purpose only, we 
shall not deal with them liere. a 

Now the meaning of the names is set forth. Being of 
the nature of attributes, these names which are masculine, 
feminine, and neuter, qualify that Brahman alone, which 
is pure consciousness. For in reality there is no gender in 
Brahman ; and the genders follow the words only. Hence 
Vishnu Bhagavata Pr. says : “ Brahman is neither woman 
nor eunuch, nor man, nor any other being.” Kalidasa also 
says : “ O Mother, who art pure consciousness, thou art 
neither man, nor woman, nor eunuch, nor is any gender to 
be attributed to (the name of) thy husband.” Hence in 
meditating on Devi, any desired form may be chosen. 
Thus, it is said: “ One may meditate upon Devi in the form 
of a man, or of a woman, or as existence-consciousness-bliss 
(sat'chit-dnanda) without attributes.” Hence the Pranava 

1 This clearly shows that even the ffudras are not barred from the 
use of the sacred syllable as is asserted by so many. 

* After explaining the verse as in the Guru and Pranava, the 
commentator again explains the above verse as an index of the 
names. I have omitted the translation. 



38 


LAMTA SAHASRANAMA 


is always to be used at the beginning to show the 
community of the three genders (as applied to Brahman;. 

This (Pranava) exclusively denotes Brahman. The 
-•Bh.-Glta (17, 23) says: “Om, Tat, and Sat,—these have 
been declared to be the threefold designations of 
Brahman.” Or, this syllable Om may mean the five Gods, 
Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Is'vara and Sadas'iva, correspond¬ 
ing respectively to its parts A-U-M, Ndda, and Bindu. The 
-i. Br. Naradiya Pr. says : “ A means Brahma, U, Vishnu, 
M, Rudra, and the half syllable (ardhamatra), the 
Supreme; thus it is said, Pranava is the speech and 
Brahman is the thing spoken of. This relation between the 
two (Brahman and Pranava) is merely figurative.” 
Because, they are one and the same. Pushpadanta 1 also 
says : “The syllable Om comprehends thee, O Refuge 
of all, both in thy individual and collective aspects.” In 
the Sttta Samhita (IV, 5, 17 to 22) many meaning? have been 
given to it. “ When a thing is known, instead of saying ‘ I 
know ’ they say Om, when a thing is not known, instead 
of saying ‘ I do not know,’ they say Om ; when a thing is 
doubtful, instead of saying ‘ it is doubtful ’ they say Om. 
Thus instead of using the words for ether (Akas'a) and 
other objects, they say Om. Hence the Pranava has various 
meanings, vis., Akasa, etc., like the words for pot, jar, etc.; 
and it is said that the Pranava is equal to Brahman as it 
illuminates everything. That twice-born one who repeats 
this all-embracing Mantra (Om) soon obtains the fruit to be 
gained by reciting all Mantras.” Brihatparas'ara Smr. also 
says, “ Pranava is the great reality (Tatva) ; it is the three 
Vedas; “the three qualities (Gunas), the three Devatas, the 
three'dwellings, the three modes of consciousness, the three 
stages, the three divisions, the three times, and the three 
. genders. Thus say the holy men, all this (Universe) is 

1 I believe his famous work “ Mahimnastava ” is meant here ; and 
there are nearly twenty commentaries written on the above hymn by 
different authors. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


39 


pervaded by the threefold Pranava.” Again it is said : “ Agni, 
Soma and Shrya (fire, the moon and the Sun) are the three 
dwellings ; the inner consciousness, the outer consciousness 
and concentrated consciousness are the three Prajnas (con¬ 
sciousness) ; heart, throat, and palate are the three stages 
(Sthanas) ; A, U., M, are the three divisions (Matras). At the 
beginning of every act, the three-divisioned Pranava must 
be pronounced. It is contained in every word and by it 
all is pervaded ; without it no word can be uttered.” The” 
Gopathabrahmana 1 says : “ Now we shall enquire about 
Omkara. What is its root ? What is its noun-basis (Pratipa- 
dika) ? by what name is it denoted ? What is its gender ? 
what is its case ? and what is its Svara (tone) ? ” These 
and many other points have been' dealt with in the first 
chapter of that Brahmana. In the Pranava chapter of the 
Prapanehasira by the commentator Padmapldacharya , 2 in 
the Pranavirthadlpika, and in similar books, the Pranava 
has been elaborately described and we refer our readers 
to those books. 


1 There is a beautiful description of the syllable Om in the 1st 
book of the above Brahmana. 

' 3 The MSS. are in the Baroda Library formed by me between 
1916—22 with 13,000 and odd MSS. 



CHAPTER II 


THE THOUSAND NAMES 

The holy Mother (Stomata). 

The mother is usually called upon in times of sorrow ; 
but our natural mothers are not able to remove the thfee 
kinds of pains ( Tdpatraya ). Great men have said : “ Since 
I have had many thousands of births, I have had many 
mothers ; many also have been my fathers ; I know not 
how many I am yet to have in the future; and their 
number is beyond calculation. 0 Treasure-house of 
compassion ! save me, who am overpowered with fear and 
have no other refuge, from the vast and disastrous ocean of 
Samsara.” The greatest world-mother is the only one who 
is capable of removing the endless misery (of existence). 
We should praise her as the mother so that she may be 
induced to show mercy to us. 

Or, S'rlm&ta : S’rl Lakshmi or Sarasvati, and 
the mother, i.e. , the mother of Lakshmi or Sarasvati ; the 
Yyadlkos'a says : “ S'ri means Lakshmi, Sarasvati, nurse or 
earth (DhStri), Varga (group or family) prosperity, success, 
beauty, means of subsistence, the decoration of ornaments, 
wisdom and the first day of the fortnights.” Hence, S'ri- 
mdta does not mean here the wife of Rudra, the equal of 
Sarasvati and Lakshmi, but, the creator of the three, the 
spouse of Paramas'iva, the Great Queen ( Para BhattCtriM). 
Hence in order to attain moksha she should be praised. 

Or, ma to measure, that which measures S’rl, i.e., 
Lakshmi, that which limits being necessarily superior to 



1ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


41 


the thing limited ; thus the meaning is that She is the 
limitless S'rl, i.e.. Salvation. 

Or, Sri, as said in the Srutis, “which is the ambrosia 
to great men ” means Vedas ; She who taught Brahma the 
three Vedas little by little (ma) ; the S'ruti (Sve. Up., 6— 
18) says : * He who made Brahma in the beginning and 

taught the Vedas to him.” 1 

Or, She is the first manifestation in the form of Vyasa 
(ma, the classifier of the Vedas). 

Or, S'rl, poison ; ma, to fix—(referring to the poison 
fixed in Siva’s throat). In these two last cases the name 
S'rlmdta is masculine, S'iva and S'akti being one and the 
same ; or it (Srlmats) is feminine qualifying (Vis'eshana) 
one of Devi’s aspects Prakam or Vimarm (Primary or 
Secondary) which are understood in that name. 

Or, the names of great men and things should have 
the honorific word S'rl prefixed to them. Hence we find 
the words, S 'rlchakra, Sri-taila, S'rividya, S'riphala, etc. In 
this case Mata means progenitor of all. This meaning is 
supported by the S'ruti (Tai.:Up., Ill, 2): “ That from 
which these beings are born.” As we do not find the 
word S'rl prefixed to the names Isvara, Isana, etc., 
meaning Paragiva, so also the word Mata means Tripura- 
sundarl. 

Or, when the six letters, Ha, Sa, Pa, Ka, La, Da, of 
the mantra called ‘ Bala ’ are combined with three vowels 
at the end, the result is the mantra forming the three 
groups (Ktttas) called Mata. This explanation is supported 
by great men who in their commentaries on the Sloka 
(Laghu Stuti Slo. 18) beginning with “ Maya, KundalinI, 
etc.” in whiqh the word Mata occurs, explained it in this 


1 If the other reading Tatmiat, is adopted then the meaning-wonld 
be “promulgated the Vedas through him.” 

4 Bhatta Narayana.— Sri, Universe, and Mata, creator ; or Sri, ais- 
varya, and Mata, knower or witness. 



42 


LALITA SAHASRANAWA 


2. The great Queen (S'rl MahSrajnl). 

The controller of the created Universe. The Sfruti 
(Tai.-Up., Ill, 2) says “ That by which, when created they 
live.” 

The three letters of S'rlvidya are hidden here ; one of 
them is called S'hodazlkalO, (the sixteenth and last part). 
For it is said, “That Kala (sixteenth) should be imparted to 
a faithful student, devoted to his Guru.” This has not 
been learned by many modern students from the Guru ; 
but it has been revealed by Lolla in his commentary on the 
Saundaryalahari (32nd Slo.) where he has made it plain 
that it is the first among the. Mantras of C/iaturlakshmt. 
The other two (letters) are called Prakdfa and Vimaria 
(Primary and Secondary). For the Sanketapaddhati says, 
“ A is the first of all letters, PrakdZa, and the supreme 
S'iva ; Ha is the last and stands for KaM (Devi) and it is 
said to be Viniarka.” These two are very secret,, and their 
nature is described in the Yoginihridaya (II, 21) rather in 
a veiled manner. “ To Her the Viyat and Kala (i.e., a 
and ha) are the other ( S'abda ) forms, which are in the 
second bindu and at the end of Visarga, respectively, 
which are supreme, crossed (i.e., tended towards manifesta¬ 
tion). 1 ” We have ourselves dealt with the subject in full 
in the Varivasyarahasya. 

Again the part of the word Rajnl (Queen) contains the 
Mantra called “ Mayarajnl ”. * 

3. The ruler on the lion-throne’ (Srimat Simhasanes'- 

The throne occupied by kings is called Simhasana, i.e., 
the best seat. 

1 Bhaskararaya wrote, after this present work, an elaboratei 
commentary on Yoginihridaya and named it Setuhandha. He says, 
when he comments on the above verse, that there are four bindus 
named Turlya, or Kamakala (the unity of S’iva aind Devi), (2) 
Kam&Hndu or Madhyabindu (a, S'iva himself), (3) Visarga ( Ha, 
Devi), and (4) Hardakala. 

1 Thrones are generally supported by golden figares of lions 
placed at the corners. 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


43 


The -word Simha may mean the lion that is the vehicle 
of Devi. The Devi Pr. in the chapter on the meaning of 
her names says, “The Devi, in her girlhood, seated on a 
lion, slew Mahisha (an Asura) ; hence she is known as 
the slayer of Mahisha and as Simh&saneivarl (the Queen 
seated on a lion). 

Again, Simha, pain. The grammarians say : “ The 
word Simha came out of the root hitma, pain, Siva from 
the root Vast desire ; these two words are - formed by 
reversing their respective letters like the word Pus'll aka 
(seer) to Kalyapa.” Asana expelling, and h'varl powerful ; 
i.e., she is the destroyer of the Universe. Thus the S'ruti 
(Tai.- Up. Ill, 2) says, “ That into which they enter at their 
death.” ■ 

Or, ma five. There are eight Mantras called Simha- 
sana, from Ohaitanyabhairavl to Sampatpradobhairavl. 
Six of .these taken together form three pairs, which 
with the remaining two make up five, situated in the 
four quarters and in the centre. The Jn&narnava 
says: “O great ruler, tell me how Devi Tripura, 
ascended the five thrones and how the thrones came 
into existence.” Thus questioned S’iva replied, “0 
ruler of the Devas, Brahma, when he began to create, 
was devoid of intellect; he worshipped Tripurasundarl 
and became the creator. Having with great Tapas 
worshipped Brahma, Indra became the king of the Devas 
and the protector of the Eastern quarter. Then Tripura 
became pleased and established herself in the eastern part 
of the throne, etc.” Thus the name which contains the 
Mantras is the Simh&mna mantra 

Having thus by the above three names indicated 
Brahman in his three aspects of creator, preserver, and 
destroyer, the author proceeds to state from names 4 to 
999, the birth, etc., of the Mother, according to the Pnriinas, 

1 Bh. Xilr&yana says, Sri, Lakshin I», i.e., Devi’s Simharana i- s 
surrounded by many Lakshmis. 



44 


LALITA S AH ASUAN AMA 


indicating the ether two aspects, disappearance, and con¬ 
ferring benefits, otherwise called the cause of bondage, and 
the removal from it. 1 

4. Who was born from the altar of the fire of con¬ 
sciousness (Chidagnikunda sambhllta). 

VMt, pure Brahman, and he is the altar of fire ; for he 
dispels the darkness of ignorance ( AvidyQ, ). In the stanza, 
“in the fire of consciousness that burns within uninter¬ 
ruptedly, without fuel, dispelling the darkness of illusion ” 
we see that consciousness is compared with fire. The 
commentary in the S'akti Stltras on the Sfltra beginning 
“chitvahni . . .” (the fire of consciousness, etc.) 

says “ consciousness is fire because by its nature it consumes 
the Universe.” Born (Sambhuta) : By the quality called 
consciousness she abides in that fire, but is not born from 
it. Because consciousness and the thing possessed of that 
is one and the same. Sankshepas’Jrlrakacharya says : “ The 
pure energy of consciousness of the Highest Lord is said 
to be consciousness itself.” 

Or, agnikunda : the ordinary altar of the fire of con¬ 
sciousness. The simile is used in the Bh.-Gita also (IV, 
37) : “ 0 Arjuna, so does the fire of wisdom reduce all the 
actions to ashes.” Devi took her birth from the sacrificial 
fire as it is said in the Renuka Pr. “ There was in the 
family of Ikshvaku, a prince named Renu, etc.,” after 
describing his penance and the boon got from Devi it 
goes on, “ meanwhile, 0 twice-born one, out of the sacrifi¬ 
cial fire slowly arose a woman divinely beautiful, adorned 
with divine ornaments and bright as the moon, and stepped 
out quickly. She is the only one, the supporter of the 
Universe, there is none beside her.” The Brahmanda Pr., 
after describing how Indra was persecuted by Bhandasura, 
says : “ Then he constructed a very beautiful sacrificial 
altar many Yojanas in area . . . and the Devas offered 

the flesh of their body as oblations . . . When the Devas 
were about to offer up the whole of their bodies there 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


45 


appeared a great blaze of light, bright as millions of suns 
and cool as millions of moons put together ; in the midst 
of this light was seen an indescribable wheel-form 
(S'rlchakra) ; from its centre arose the great Devi shining 
like the morning sun ... On beholding the great Devi, 
the soul of all, Indra and the Devas were filled with 
ecstasy and they bowed down to her again and again.” 

To the doubter of the birth of the eternal Devi, the 
reply is given by the following name. 

5. Manifested herself for fulfilling the objects of the 
Devas. (DevakArya samudyatA.) 

She became manifest in order to slay the Asuras, 
Bhand&sura and MahishAsura. and for other reasons. The 
Markarideya Pr. says : “ Though eternal, she is said to be 
born whenever she manifests herself for the accomplish¬ 
ment of the object of the Devas.” In the Ktlrma Pr. the 
Devi says'to Himavat, “ Called upon by the Devas and 
remembering the greatness of the task, disregarding my 
father Daksha, who insulted Mahes'vara (my husband), and 
for the sake of establishing righteousness, and by reason of 
your devotion, I was born from the body of Mena, having 
chosen you as my father ...” (1) 

Thus having described the real (PrakAs'aJ form of 
Devi, he now describes her secondary (Vimars’a) form. 

6. Bright as thousands of rising suns. (UdyatbhA- 
nusahasrabhA,) 

This indicates that She is very red. The Svachchanda- 
tantra says : “ LalitA the universal form, is said to be Her 
own self (».e., PrakASa), the red colour is her Vimars'a one. 
To worship Her is . to meditate on Her as such.” The 
Yamakes'varatantra also says, “ The Devi Tripura herself is 
her real form, and her red-complexion is the manifested 
one.” 

Thus there are three forms of Devi, which equally 
partake of both the Pralc&fa and Virriar sa aspects , viz., the 
physical (Sthfila), the subtle (Sofahma), and the supreme 



46 


TjALITA kahasbanama 


(Para) ; the physical form has hands, feet, etc. ; the subtle 
consists of Mantra and the supreme is the Vssana (though it 
means ideal or mental ; according to Mantra S'ftstra it is a 
technical word meaning real or own). The snbtle form 
again is threefold (vide the com. on 11th name). 1 Of these 
three forms, the physical one is now described. 

7. Endowed with four arms. (ChaturbShu samanvitd.) 

8. Holding the noose of desire. (,RagasvarflpapSS3dhya.) 

After mentioning her arms, he describes her weapons 

which are of three kinds, by this and the three next names. 

Desire (Rflf/a) or a peculiar mental modification or wish 
(ichchd). Desire is the Supreme (the 3rd) vasanaform, the 
noose being the gross form. This weapon she has in her 
lower left hand. 

9. Shining with the elephant hook of both wrath and 
worldly knowledge. (KrodhAkArftnkus’ojvala). 

Wrath (Krodha) is the mental modification known as 
hatred. A/cdra, worldly knowledge. Some say krodha 
means knowledge ; but it is opposed to the S'ruti which says, 
“wrath is elephant-hook.” Hence she shines holding in 
her lower right hand the elephant hook which is both 
hatred and worldly knowledge. The Pftrvachatus's'atisastra a 
says : “ The noose and the elephant-hook of Her are spoken 
of as desire and anger.” The Tantra RAja in the VftsanA 
chapter says: “Mind is the bow of Sugarcane, desire the 
noose, anger the goad, and tlie five subtle elements 
(TanmStras) the five arrows of flowers.” But the 


’ The MS. has the following lines : in the Yogavasishta the Lord 
says, “ 0 Sinless one know that X have two forms, ordinary and 
supreme. The ordinary is possessed with hand®, etc., which the 
ignorant men worship. My supreme form, which has no beginning 
nor end the only one, without affliction, is named by the words 
Brahman, Atman, Paramatma, etc.” In another place also it is said 
“ The ordinary is divided into two as physical and subtle. The 
water, etc., of the Ganga are the fourth form more dense.” 

2 It is said to be another name for the first part of the Vamakes'vara 
tantra, and the second one being called ‘ Uttarachatus's'ati or 
Yoginlhridaya ’. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


47 


Yoginlhridaya (I, 53) says : “ The noose is Ichchas'akti, 
the goad, JnSna, and the bow and arrows Kriyas'akti.” (2) 

10. Armed with the sugarcane bow of mind. 
(Manortipekshukodanda.) 

Mind characterised with both Sankalpa and Vikalpa. 
This is in her left upper hand. 1 

11. Having the arrows of the five subtle elements. 
(Pancha tanmatrasayaka.) 

The Svachchandasangraha says : “By the qualities of 
sound, etc., the elements are to be decided . . . etc.” 

The five subtle elements, viz., sound, touch, etc., are the 
arrows ; these are in her upper right hand. The Vama- 
kes'varatantra says, “sound, touch, and other subtle ele¬ 
ments are her arrows and mind her bow.” The Kadimata 
also says : “ The arrows are of three kinds—gross, subtle and 
Supreme ; the gross are flowers, the subtle are the mantras, 
and the Supreme are the vasanas. The gross arrows are the 
five flowers, the lotus, the Rakta Kairava, the Kalhara, 
the Indivara and the mango-flower.” The Kalika Pr. 
describes them thus:—‘causing joy,’ ‘pleasing,’ ‘causing 
confusion,’ ‘ causing to fade,’ and ‘ causing death,’ are the 
five arrows which produce confusion even in ascetics." 
The Jnanarnava says : “‘confusing,’ ‘ putting to flight,' 
‘ attracting,' ‘ controlling ’ and ‘ causing madness,’ are the 
five names of the arrows.” The Trantraraja says, “ ‘ excit¬ 
ing,' ‘maddening,’ ‘.confusing,’ ‘stimulating,’ and ‘causing 
to fade ’ are the five arrows.” 

Again these names (8 to 11J contain the weapon 
Mantras. The word ‘ Ragasva (of 8(h) can be divided into 
Jia+aga+Sva. Aga means Sthanu, i.e., Siva whose 
letter is Ha, The lexicon says : “ Ha means Siva, ether, and 
Sthanu" (a post and one of the aspects of Siva). Sva, l 
with the Bindu Cm). Thus the subtle form of the noose is 
the Mantra formed by combining Ra, Ha, and l, with the 

1 Bh. Kara : mind represents the whole universe ; so the Gopavana 
Sruti says “Mind has five qualities.” 



48 


fjALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Bindu ; of course ra follows ha as usual. Krodh&le&ra, 
etc., (9th) Kro + dha + <*=Krodha. The word kdra joins at 
the end of each of the three ; Ankus'a, i.e. , the Anusvira 

Cm ). 1 

Manor ana-, etc. (10th) Manas means tha. The lexicon 
says, “ tha means the ruler of the right nose and mind.’* 
Kodanda Anus'vara (m). The Rob's says, “ Kodanda means 
An n s'vara.” The names 9, 10 and 11 contains Da, Ra, Ka, 
La, Ya, 8a, and Va, and a, l, n, with Bindn. When com¬ 
bined according to the rules, these give the BIja (seed 
letter) of the Mantras of weapons. The division of the 
Bljas for the weapons can only be learned from the Guru.’ 

12. Bathing the whole universe with her own 
rosy effulgence. (Nijitrunaprabhapfiramajjatbrahman da¬ 
man da la). 

Rosy-effulgence —as precribed for the morning con¬ 
templation in the Nyasas, viz., Saubhagya, etc. (vide 
Yoginihridaya, III, 48 to 74). 

13. Her hair is adorned with the (flowers of) Gham- 
paka, Asoka, PunntXga and Saugandhika ; (Champakasoka- 
punnaga saugandhika lasatkacha). 

The physical form of Devi as born from the altar of 
fire (4th name) is described from head to foot, the head 
being taken up first as it also represents the first Kfda 
named Vdgbhava (group) of the Panchadail Mantra. 

Her hair gives scent to the flowers. It is said, “ Thou 
knowest, 0 honey bee, the smell of the flowers. Give’me 
the truth. Can I compare the odours of the hair of 
Devi with anything ? ” 

14. Her crown is resplendent with rows of Kuruvinda 
gelns. (Kuruvinda manis'reni kant kotiramandita.) ° 

Kuruvinda gems are called Padinar&ga, etc. The 
Garnda Pr. in the Ratna chapter describes different kinds of 
Here the commentator has not given the Mantra, the result of 
^ “ Bh. Kara , like the idea of serpent in a rope the whole universe_is 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


49 


rubies which can be obtained from different mines and 
rivers. “ The rubies obtained from Kuruvinda are to be 
preferred to those .from Sphatika ; they confer love, 
prosperity, and devotion to Hari.” The drift is, if one 
who meditates on Her as wearing such gems, his devotion 
will be increased. (4) 

15. Her forehead is bright as the moon on the eighth 

day. (AshtamlchandravibhrSjadalika sthalas'obhitS.) - 

16. The tiny mark of Kastfirl on it is like the spot in 

the moon. (Mukhachandra kalanksbha mriganabhivi- 
s’eshaka.) (5) 

17. Her eyebrows are the entrance arches of the palace 
of KSmarSja. (Yadanasmara mangalyagrihatoranachillika.J 

18. Her eyes are like fishes playing in the tank of the 

beauty of her face. (Vaktralakshmiparlvahachalan- 
minabhalochana.) (6) 

19. Her nose is beautiful like the newly blown cham- 
paka flower. fNavachampaka pushpabhanSsJdanda virftjita.) 

20. Shining with the jewels on her nose, which excel 
the stars in splendour. (Tarakanti tiraskiri nasabharana- 
bhasura.) 

Tara may also mean, two goddesses, Man gal a and 
s'ukla ; or one of the goddesses, Taraka. The jeivels are 
Mdnikya and Mauktika. (7) 

21. Decked with clusters of the Kadamba flowers 
worn above her ears. (Eadambamanjariklipta karnaphra 
manohara.) 

22. The two jewels in them are the sun and the moon, 
(Tatankayugalibhftta tapanodupamandala.) 

It is said, “ The sun and the moon are the breasts, 
eyes, and earrings of Devi ; so says the Sruti.” (8) 

23. Her cheeks eclipse the brightness of the ruby, 
Padmaraga.- (Padmaraga Siladars’a paribhavi kapola bhflh.) 

24. Her lips put to shame the colour of fresh corals 

and Birnba fruit. (Navavidruma bimbas'rl nyakkftri rada- 
nachchada.) (9) 



50 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


25. She shines with her two rows of teeth in the fhrm 
of the bnd of pure knowledge. (S'nddha vidyankura 
kSradvijapankti dvayojvala.) 

In the SabhSpati s'uddhavidya parinaya, the identity of 
the idea and 1 this ’ is set forth. In the Dattatreya 
Samhita ' and other works also S'rlvidya is explained from 
the standpoint of that identity. Hence S’rlvidya is meant 
by S'uddhavidya. S’nddha, pure, that which is the negation 
of the stain of ignorance. . Vidya, ■Bhodas'ltfddya. Her teeth 
resemble the buds pi tile sixteen syllabled Mantra. 

This (Shodasi) sprung from the Mtdadhdra of the great 
Mother, and proceeding through the stages of Para, 
Patyantl, etc., emerged from her mouth in the Vaikhcerl 
form ; and it was transmitted from teacher to pupil. 

The Para form is mere sound (S'abdabrahman) , the 
potentiality of growth in the seed ; Pa&yantir is the seed 
beginning to, sprout; the Madhyama is when the first two 
small leases appear, .but are not" yet separated; the 
Vaikharl is when these two small leaves are separated but 
. joined at the root. This is what is here called the bud 
( ankura ) f in that state there is a resemblance to the teeth. 
As they are thirty-two in number so are the sixteen twofold 
buds of the sixteen-syllabled mantra. Or the word Dvija 
indicates another meaning also ; the Vidya beginning with 
the Vedas chiefly belong to the Brahmanas. The S'ruti 1 says, 
“ Vidya approached a Brahman.” Taught by him it (vidya) 
spread abroad. Hence the Brahmanas are the buds of 
vidya. Moreover as the Brahmanas came forth from the 
mouth of Devi, they may be compared to her teeth. 

Or, there are thirty-two initiations (DiJeshOs) as laid 
down in the Tantras ( Vide the Amnayastava) vis. 
S'uddhavidya, Bala, Dvadas'drdhamatanginl, etc., up to 
Anuttara ; these are called the two rows of the twice-born 4 ; 


1 Vide chapter 1, verse 15, com. supra. 

2 Twice-born refers also to teeth as they grow twice. 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


51 


for initiation is a birth, and, regarding the thread ceremony 
{Upanafyqna as the first birth), it is a second birth. This is 
not .contradicted by the saying, “ Initiation is the third 
birth ” because there the birth from the mother’s womb is 
counted (as the first birth). 

Or S’ltddhavidya, the' three-syllabled Mantra, ankura , 
beginning, a certain initiation is called by that name and 
is to be begun before going on to the thirty-two initiations 
referred to above. Hence Devi can only be attained by 
those great; men whose souls are purified by the thirty-two 
D Iks has (from S'uddhavidya to Anuttara) handed down 
according to tradition, and not by others. 

* 26. The fragrance from the betel' leaves she chews 
attracts the quarters. .(Karptlra vltika moda samSkarshat 
digantara.) ..(10) 

27. The sweet melody of her words put to-shame the 
Kachchapl (vlnti of Sarasvatl). (Nijasall'lpa madhurya 
vinirbhatsita kachchapl.) ' . 

The Amaras'esha says, “The vln5 of Visv&vasn is 
named Brihati, that of Tumburu, Kaldvati, that of NSrada 
MaKatl, and of Sarasvatl Kachchapl." 

The desire for hearing the Vina, in the world, is due 
to the beautiful melody coming out indistinctly from 
Shadja, etc., of the Gamut, though there is no clear hearing 
of the letters. The Kachchapl of Sarasvatl, speaks like 
the parrot speech, a little distinct, along with melody. But 
it is indisputable that with distinct utterance the sweeter 
melody of her words excels all the musical instruments. 
So it is said in the Saundaryaiaharl (66 Slo.),When 
Sarasvatl with her Vina sings the various triumphs, U.e., 
the destruction of Tripura and Daksha, etc.) of Pas'upati, 0 
thou, of beautiful speech, she has immediately to close her 
instrument with her finger tips, directly you start 
your vocal music, shaking your head, and with sweet 
melody which has the power of influencing the Vina 
sound.” 



52 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


28. The mind of Karnes's is drowned in the fulness of 
the glory of her sweet smile. (Mandasmita prabhftpQra 
majjatkames'amanasa.) 

Kama means Bind-u which forms the part of the body 
of the Kamokala and which is the sun termed fire, and 
moon (Af/nlSorna). The KSmakaiavilSsa 1 says, “ Bindu is 
the form of Ahankara ; the sun is the form of the pair 
{Kama and Kala) of equal essence. Kama is that which 
is desired ; so also the Kala. The two Bindus (Kama and 
Kala) are manifested as fire and moon.” l#vara lord, 
that is Rajurajes J vara. According to the doctrine of 
Mlmamsa the mind is omnipresent ; when it is said 
that mind is ‘ drowned,’ it shows that Devi’s glory Is 
unlimited. (11) 

29. Illuminated by the beauty of (Her) chin the 
equal of which is not to be found. (Anakalita sadriSya 
chubuka sTIviraj ita.) 

30. Adorned with the marriage thread tied by Kames'a 

around her neck. (Kames'abaddha mangaly stltra s'obhita 
kandhara). 11 (12) 

31. Her arms are encircled with golden ornaments. 
(Kanakangada keyflra kamanlyabhujanvita.) 

32. Having a pearl dangling from a necklace of 
gems and gold. (Ratnagraiveya chintaka lolamukta 
phalanvita.) 

Or, Those who meditate ( chintaka ) on the throat 
(Orlva) alone are called Graivetja chin.takus, i.e., they who 
cannot fix the deity in the cavity of the heart, but worship 
her externally are the middle class of worshippers. 

The pearl dang Una (tola) means, those who are 
bound by earthly desires. The Agni Pr. says ,-“.Lola 


' This belongs to one of the Devi Tautras written by Puny&nanda- 
natha and a commentary upon it by Xatananaudanitha. 

2 The marriage emblem tied round the neck was not the Aryan 
custom and was not found referred to in any Vedic literature. Ear¬ 
ring was the emblem. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


53 • 


means change and desire.” These are the lowest class of 
worshippers. 

Muktas are the highest class of worshippers. She is 
in each case the fruit ( Phala ) to be obtained by these three 
classes according to their deserts. (13) 

33. Her two breasts are the price offered in exchange 
for that priceless gem—the love of Kames'vara. (Karnes'* 
vara premaratnamani prati pana stanl.) 

34. These two breasts are the two fruits growing on 

the creeper-like hair which springs from her deep navel. 
(Nabhyalavala romalilatSphala kuchadvayl.) (14) 

35. Her waist is to be inferred only from the group 
of* creeper-like hair. (Lakshyaroinalatadharata samunneya 
madhyama.) 

36. Her golden belt supports her waist which bends 

under the burden of her breasts and makes visible the 
threefolds of the skin of the stomach below the bosom. 
(Stanabhara dalanmadhya patta bandha valitraya.) U5) 

37. Her waist is bright with a rosy tinted garment. 
(Arunaruna kausumbhavastra bhasvat katitati.) 

38. Decked in a belt beautified with jewelled bells. 

(RatnakinkanikaramyaraSanadama bhftshita.) (16) 

39. The symmetry and smoothness of her thighs are 
known (only) to Karnes's. (Karnes's]nltasaubhagya marda- 
voru dvayanvita.) 

40. Her knees shine like jewelled disks. (Manikya 

makutlkara janudvayavirajita.) (17) 

41. Her calves are like the sapphire studded quiver of 
the God of love. (Indragopa parikshipta smaratfina- 
bhajanghika.) 

42. With rounded ankles. (Gftdhagulpha.) 

43. Possessed with the instep arched like the back of 

a tortoise. (Kflrmaprishtha jayishnuprapadunvita.) (18) 

44. The bright rays from her nails dispel the dark¬ 
ness of her worshippers (Nakhadidhiti sanchannanamat- 
janatamoguna.) 



54 


I.ALITA 8AHASRANAMA 


The worshipper*, Brahma, Vishnu, etc. • Darkness, 
ignorance. The meaning is the meditation on her feet 
dispels ignorance. 

In the Matsya and Padma Puranas, there is a speech of 
Nlrada, after interpreting the bodily marks (Slmndrika) of 
PArvathl to her mother, Mena. “ A husband is not yet 
born for her, 0 Lady, She will be devoid of good bodily 
marks (because she is an unconditioned one) and she will 
always have her hand raised. (Because, a great giver 
herself, hers must necessarily be above that of the one who 
receives.) And her feet will err by their own shadow. 
What more should be said ! ” Himavin hearing about these 
bad marks, addressed him with sorrow when NSrada 
replied : “When you have an occasion for great joy why 
should you manifest sorrow ! 0 Great Mountain ; you are 
bewildered because you did not understand my speech.” 
After explaining the meaning of “ No husband is born,” 
etc., (S'iva does not belong to the group of created beings) 
he says, “ I will explain what I meant by saying her feet 
will err by their own shadow.” 0 best of Mountains, Her 
feet are like lotuses, shining with bright nails. When the 
Devas and Asuras prostrate before her, the various colours 
of their jewelled crowns reflected, will drive away the rays 
of her nails which entering their hearts dispel their Tamas 
quality.” 

45. The soles of her feet by their beauty shame the 

lotus. (Padadvayaprabhajalaparakritasaroruha.) (19) 

46. Her lotus feet are adorned with jewelled anklets 
that tinkle. (S'injanamanimanjlra mandita s'rl padambuja.) 

47. Her gait is that of the swan. (Marall manda- 
gamana.) 

48. The treasure-house of beauty. (Mahalavanya- 

s'evadhih.) (20) 

49. All rosy hued (Sarvaruna). 

Her garments, ornaments, flowers, colour, etc., are 
all rosy tinted. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


55 


50. With faultless, limbs, (Anavadyangi.) 

51. Adorned with every ornament. (Sarvabharana- 
bhasura.) 

The Kalika Pr. describes forty jewels from crest jewel 
to the ring of the feet. The Kalpa Stitras (of Paras'urama 
Khanda IV, 5) give more ornaments. 

52. Sitting on the lap of S’ivakames'vara. (Siva- 
kames'varAnkastha.) 

The description of her physical form being ended 
that of the seat of Devi -is commenced from this name. 

Kama means "that which is desired ; or -he who 
assumes any form at will ; this epithet {Kama) is also 
applied to Manmatha (god of love) who can also assume 
any form at will. The Kalika Pr. says, “ In the world 
there is none who like you is capable of assuming any 
form ; hence, 0 mind-born one {Manmatha), you shall be 
known by the name Kama.” 

Or, Kama means knowledge (Prajnana). The S'ruti 
says (Ait.-Up., 5-2) : “ What is called the heart and the 
mind, are perception (Samjnana), command, under¬ 
standing, knowledge, wisdom, seeing, holding, thinking, 
considering, readiness, (or suffering) remembering, con¬ 
ceiving, willing, breathing, loving, desiring ; no, all these 
are only various names of knowledge." In the said S'ruti 
the word Prajnana means S'iva only. The Stktasamhita 
(Br.-Glta, IV, 3—19 to 24) also supports this explanation. 
“ Vijnana, which is Sankara, is known by- the learned 
under many names. - Some say it is the heart . . . 

Some other theists call it control {Vas'ya). But all these 
simply denote Siva.” 

Or, Kama denotes the Lord who desires {Kama) to 
create the universe. The Br. Up., (I, 4, 17) says : “ There 
was Atman only in the beginning. He desired . . . 

Thus for the desire (Kama).” Hence the word Kama 
does not mean here Rudra or Manmatha. 

53. The beneficial (Siva). 



“ From the root 1 7 as desire, Siva is derived.” That 
is she is the desire itself ( Ichcha) of the supreme Siva. 
For this energy is worshipped by Viva. The meaning of 
Viva is given in the SaivJgamas. “ Who is as a witness 
to the modifications (of the mind), who is before the 
arising of such modifications, who is in the modifications 
about to rise, who is the cause of sensation, who is the 
support of all false and inert matter, who is consciousness 
itself, who is beloved of all, who is bliss itself, who is 
the means of obtaining all, who is connected with all, the 
Omnipresent is called S'iva. The Self-shining, pure being 
who is devoid of the distinction of Jlva, Isa, etc., is S’iva.” 

Or, as she does good (Siva) she is called S'iva ; 'or 
that in which everything rests (S'ete) ; or, who possesses 
excellent (S’iva) qualities ; or that which makes calm 
(S'amyati) ; as the BhSrata says, “ Because he fulfils all 
the actions (of men) intending their good (S'iva) he is 
.known as S'iva. 0 gods, the Danavas, and the Devas 
are the same to me ; I do good (S'iva) to all beings. 
Hence I am known as S'iva.’’ The S’ruti (S’ve.-Up., 4-11) 
.says, “ The one who is the origin (of all) dwells in every 
womb, in whom all this is involved.” The Kaivalya Up.- 
f (7) says, “three-eyed, blue-throated, and peaceful.” All 
this has been brought together, by us in the commentary 
-on the S’ivashtottaras'ata (a work enumerating one hundred 
and eight names of S'iva). “ By natural purity, by 
possessing stainless qualities, by superiority, by sup¬ 
porting the Universe, by conferring immortality (on 
worshippers), by the strength of Ichchacakti, 0 Paramas'iva, 
thou art known by the special name as S'iva in the scrip¬ 
tures.” Or, she is identical with S'iva. The Linga Pr. says, 
As is S'iva, so is Devi, as is Devi, so is S'iva, hence, as 
the notions are the same, Devi is called S'iva.’’ In another 
place in the same book, “ In reality there is no differ¬ 
ence between Urn a and S’ankara ; the oneohas assumed the 
two forms. There is no doubt in this. The Paramatman 



X-ALITA SAHASBANAMA 


57 


is called S'iva as well as S'iva.’’ The Sfitasamhita (IV, 13-2 
to 41) also says, “ 0 best of twice-born ones, she who has 
assumed the energising aspect of that Maya which is 
connected with one consciousness f chinmatra ), who is 
intellect, without attributes, self-shining, unchangeable, 
supreme bliss, and the cause of the destruction of Samsara. 
She is S'iva, She is the Supreme Devi, one with S’iva, and 
doer of good ... he who Worships this S'ankari, the ocean 
of mercy, what does he not obtain by her grace ? ”. Or S'iva 
may mean the wife of Vayu. The Linga Pr. says, “ The 
•great god liana, who pervades the whole Universe, the 
supporter of all beings is called Vayu, in his aspect of wind 
God. His wife is called S'iva and his son Manojava.” 
Again, “ He who has the cresent moon as a crest is Vayu 
and his wife is S'iva" In the Vayu Pr. also we read, “ Vayu 
is the fourth body of Liana and his wife is S'iva and his 
son is Manojava.” 

Or, she who bestows Salvation is S'iva. It is said in 
the Devi Pr.: “ S'iva is salvation and she bestows salvation 
• to Togins ; she works for good {S'iva) ; hence she is known 
by men as S'iva;’’ or men worship Devi to reach S'iva, 
hence she is S'iva. In the A'gamas we read, “ As heat is to 
fire, as light to the Sun, and moonlight to the Moon, so is 
S'iva to S'iva.” 

54. She has won over her Lord. (SvadhInavallabha.) 

This name indicates though Devi is Ichcha and other 
qualities, yet she never becomes subject to him who 
possesses the qualities. Lord, Kames'vara. The KaJika Pr. 
says, “ There he resides for ever playing with Parvatl ; the 
house of Devi is in the centre ; and S'iva is subject to it.” 
The Agama also says, “ To Her, through whom S'iva is 
enabled to bestow happiness and salvation on the mankind, 
who is consciousness itself, the first, with my whole being 
I prostrate myself.’’ The Sfl. Sam. (IV, 13-24) says, “ 0 
sages, S'iva became the cause of the Universe, Devi is his 
S’akti; without Her he is powerless.” The Acharya also 



58 


LAIjITA sahasranama 


(Saun. La. S'lo. I) says, “ When Siva is united with S'akti 
he is able to create, otherwise he is unable even to 
move.” 

Or, she through whom husbands are subjected. The 
story runs thus in the seventh book of the De. Bbag. Pr.: 
The As'vins made the husband of Sukanya, the daughter of 
S'aryati, similar to themselves in form and asked her to 
point him out. She then resorted to Devi. “ O world- 
mother, I am deeply afflicted and flee to you for protection. 
Protect now, my wifehood, I worship thy feet.” Thus 
praised, “ Devi, Tripurasundari, gave her wisdom bjP 
which her husband became subject to her.” We also read 
in the sixth book of the same how S'achi recovered Indra. (21) 

55. Dwelling on the middle peak of Mount Sumeru. 
(Sumeru madhya s'ringastha.) 

After describing the important seat of Devi as on the 
lap of Kameavara’s left thigh (52 No.), the author now 
proceeds to describe some other seats also of Devi. The 
middle peak is the fourth one. The great ascetic Durvasa 
says in his Lalitastavaratna (SI. 2 to 4) : “ Let the gold 
mountain be victorious, whose body is made up of the 
whole universe, filled by the music of the divine ladies 
living in the golden creeper-bowers of mountain peak ; we 
salute the three peaks of it, which are the seats of Brahma, 
Vishnu and S'iva, expanding to the four quarters (of the 
globe). In the middle of them there is another peak, four 
hundred Yojanas in height, beautifying the place by the 
golden rays of flowers and I worship it.” 

5G. Ruler of the beautiful city. (S'rlman nagara 

nayika.) 

The cities are of two kinds , one of them is on the 
middle peak of Mount Meru. The Lalitastavaratna (SI. 5) 
says, “I salute the city of ancient Vidya four hundred 
Yojanas in circumference constructed by the celestial 
architect, beautified with many walls.” It is said in the 
Vidyaratnabashya, “There is also another city in the midst 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


59 


of the Ocean of milk.” With many walls means twenty- 
five in number. The second city is outside and beyond all 
the worlds, in the island of gems (Ratnadvlpa), in the 
middle of the Ocean of Nectar. The RudraySmala says, 
“ Outside and beyond the countless myriads of world 
systems, in the centre of the Ocean of Nectar, more than a 
thousand crores in extent, in the'Oem-island ( Ratnadvlpa ), 
a hundred crores in area, the lamp of the world, there is 
the supreme city of S’rividya, three lacs of Yojanas 
in height and adorned with twenty-five walls representing 
. the twenty-five Tatvas.” But in the VidySratna Bhashya 
the word S'rlmannagara (beautiful city) is explained as 
S'rJchakra. The Vis'va, also says, “ Chakra (wheel) means 
city, house, hamlet, town and abode ; ” and the commentator 
on the Sutra (13) of Gaudapada interpreted the word S'ri- 
pura to mean S'richakra. “ One may enter the city (nagara) 
without knowing the Rishi; the city (ptlr) of the Devas is 
impregnable ; the city is surrouned by nectar, etc.,” in 
these and other S’rutis, city (Ptir—or—nagara) means 
Chakra; (vide Tai.-Ar., I) and Nagara and Chakra are one 
and the same. 

57. Residing in a house (built of) Chint5mani. 
(Chintamanigrihantastha.) 

Ghintamani is that jewel which yields all the objects 
desired ; of this the city is built. This house is described 
in detail in the Brahmanda Pr. : “ In that house of Chinta- 
mani all is Ghintamani." This house having an extent of 
a thousand Yojanas is above the world system. The 
Rudrayamala says, ‘ ‘ In that Ghintamani house of a thousand 
Yojanas in extent.” The house which is on Meru is smaller 
in Size. The Lalittstavaratna (S'lo. 105) says, “ May that 
house, built of Chinttmani stone which is on the northern 
side of S'ringaravana ton Meru), whither all the Devas go 
to worship, remove all my mental trouble ( chinta In the 
commentary on the Gandapida Stltra (No. 7) the Chinth- 
mani house is explained as the place of origin of all those 



60 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Mantras which bestow' all desired objects ( chintita ), and its 
construction is elaborately described. 

58. Sitting upon a seat formed by five Brahmas. 
(Pancha brali mSsanas th i ta.) 

The Bahurflpashtaka and the BhairavaySmala Tantras 
say, “ There is the supreme house of Devi, built of chintd- 
mani stone ; the great bed itself is Siva, the pillow the 
great Is'ana ; on that beautiful couch, the mat is SadSs'iva ; 
the four supports are Brahma, Hari, Rudra and Is'ana ; and 
the great Indra is the spittoon ; on that bed reclines the 
great Is'Snl, the supreme Tripurasundarl.” The proper 
places of Brahma, etc., should be known from the 
Puranas. (22) 

59. Residing in the great forest of lotuses. (Maba- 
padmatavlsamstha.) 

The Rudrayamala speaking of the real form of the 
lotus forest, beyond (the world system), says, “ Surrounded 
by a forest of lotuses, three lacs of Yojanas in extent.” 
Another one is (on the Meru). The Lalitastavaratna says 
(ST 106 to 108), “ Let us worship the forest of lotuses 
which is ... ” * 

Again the thousand petalled lotus, that is in the 
Brahmarandlira, is also called Padmdtavl. The Svach- 
chandatantra says, “ Above that there is the Kula lotus, 
thousand petalled, facing downward . . . This is-known 
as the great lotus garden, above that is Santana.'' For 
there - is one form both for the body and for the Universe, 
( Pindanda and Brahmando). This has been dealt with in 
detail in the commentary on the verse Andlbhava, etc., of 
Aruna.-Up. ( vide Tai.-Ar., 1.1. 

‘ 60. Living in a grove of Kadamba trees. (Kadamba- 
vanavasinl) 

The palace of Chintamani is surrounded by a gallery 
formed of gems ( Manimantapa .), around this is the grove 
of Kadamba trees. The BhairavayAmala says, “ The abode 
of bindu is the ocean of nectar, the five Yonis, the five 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


61 


S’a/cti angles in the (S’rlchaJm'o) are the divine trees, there 
is the grove of Nlpa trees, within that is the gallery of 
gems, within that again is the palac^ of Chint&mani, and 

In the PurSnas there is also a description which says, 
“ There are Kadamba trees seven Yojancis in height in the 
spaces between the walls of gold and silver.” 

61. Residing in the centre of the ocean of nectar. 
(Sudhasigara madhyastha). 

That ocean is the one above (in heaven). The S'ruti 
(Tai.-Bra., 1-6-2) declares, “ The city is surrounded by 
nectar.” Another one is in the place of bindu in the centre 
of the moon in the pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus. 
The third one is, “ In the city called Ayxirajita (unconquer¬ 
able) to be attained with devotion by the Saguna Brahman ; 
there are two ocean-like lakes of nectar named respectively 
ara and nva ” (vide Chchan.-Up., VIII, 5, 4). These two are 
dealt with in the commentary on the Vedanta S'fttra of 
Vyasa. (IV, 4*22) “ No return according to Scriptures.” 
All these oceans are here meant. 

62. Lovely eyed. (Kamakshl). 1 

Or, She whose eyes are Kama (S'iva). This is the 
special name of the presiding deity of KSnchlpura. 

63. The fulfiller of desires. (Kamadayini.) 

The Brahmanda Pr. says, “Omniscient, she fulfils 
all desires through her aspect as the witness. Brahma the 
grandsire of the world, seeing these doings of Devi, gave 
her the name Kamakshl and Kamewari.” 

Or, she who bestows (Da) Kames'vara on her worship¬ 
per, in the sense of bestowing identity with S'iva. Or she 
who destroys (Dya, to kill), Kama , manmatha ; (the god of 
love). Or, Kamada S'iva and ayinl, endowed with good 
fortune ; hence S'iva endows her with good fortune. Or, 
Kama, S'iva and Daya, inheritance ; she whose inheritance 


1 Bh. NarS, Ka (Sarasvati) and Ma (Lakshml) are her eyes. 



62 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


is S'iva —that ownership is hers, inseparably fixed from 
time immemorial. 

The 10th verse on Paribhabha gives out as usual the 
division of the names from 64 to 127. (Prom 10th to 32 
are not translated.) 

Now he begins a clear description, of the doings of the 
physical form of Devi, indicating her most secret supreme 
form by Secret sayings. 

64. Her power is praised by the assemblies of 
multitudes of Devas and Rishis. (Devarshigana sanghata 
stflyamanatma vaibhava). 

Vaibhava (power) ; this may mean the all-pervading 
quality of Devi. Sanghata (assemblies) separate assent 
blies in different ways ; or Sanghata (lit. much destruction) 
is one of the names of hell—to be saved from this hell. 
Or, Sam, entirely : ghata, slaying, i.e., Bhandasura. In 
the Brahmanda Pr. it is said by the Devas who were 
troubled by Bhandasura, “ O Devi, mother of the Universe, 
victory to thee.” After praising Devi in a hymn, and 
being asked by her to choose a boon, the Devas say, “ If, 
0 beneficial one, thou art pleased, let us, who are troubled 
by the great Daityas, and whose life is (.therefore) difficult 
(to live) take refuge in thee.” In another place, ” Once 
the divine sage, Narada approached the supreme S'akti, and 
bowing down with deep reverence said . . . This Bhanda¬ 
sura, 0 Devi, afflicts the three worlds ; by you alone, and 
by no other deity, can he be conquered.” 

The real meaning of the text is, as follows : Devas, 
Brahma, etc., Rishis, Vasishta, etc., and Devarshis, Narada, 
etc., Gana,, Aditya, etc. The Agni Pr. says, “ The Gana 
Dev'atas are, the Adityas, Viswavasus, Tushitas, Bhasvaras, 
Anilas, Maharajikasadhyas, and Rudras.” According to 
the Rudrayamala, her greatness is praised “ by millions of 
Dikpalas, suns, moons, and Vasus, etc.” 

Again, if we take to explaining the deeper meaning 
(Para Rttpa) of this name, the result is described in S'aiva 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


63 


scriptures that Atman alone is praised by Devas, etc. 
(Rishis and Devarshis). The Chaitanya—who enters into 
everything (AkhilAnugata), who is all experience (akhila 
parichita), and that who is that feeling which is the seat of 
all love (corresponding to sat, chit, Ananda'). The Agni 
Pr. says, " The first Sdtra (S'iva Sutra, I, 1) says ‘ Atman is 
his consciousness (chaitanya) ’ ;'the second S'titra (I, 2) says 
‘the (worldly) knowledge is bondage.’” Hence what is 
praised or experienced by the Devas and others is the 
Atman ; for the TantrarAja says, “ The universal form 
Lalita is declared to be the very Self ” ; as she is insepar¬ 
able from the Self, her Vaibava is all-pervading, possessed 
With infinite powers, etc. 

65. She is endowed with an army of Sakties for the 
sake of slaying BhandAsura. (BhandAsura vadhodyukta 
s'akti senAsamAvritA.) 

By name (No. 5) “ manifested for the sake of fulfilling 
the actions of the Devas ” the activity of her Sthttla form 
was described ; he now continues that description. 

The fighting, etc., between Dey! and BhandAsura is fully 
described in the LalitopAkhyAna. Concerning the burning 
of Manmatha, it is said in the same book, “ Ganes'a, the 
skilful worker, seeing the ashes of the god of Love, made 
from them a beautifully formed man . . . BrahmA on 
seeing this action, said, “ well done, well done ” (Bhanda, 
Bhanda), hence, in the world he is called Bhanda.” The 
fierce quality ( asuratva ) is explained in the same Pr., “ As 
the powerful Bhanda sprang from the fire of Rudra’s 
anger, his nature is terrible ( Raudra ;), hence he is the 
terrible one ( dctnava ). 

Or, endowed with (SamAvritri), entirely identified 
with ; GaudapAda Sotra (No. 8) says : “ For the sake of 
destroying BhandAsura she, though one became many.” 

Or, Bhanda, lit. shameless. Here it means the em¬ 
bodied soul endowed with life. For it is said, “Though 
he is existence, consciousness and bliss, this embodied 



64 


I.AI.ITA sahasbanama 


soul ( BhandimO, ), is afflicted by ignorance, impermanancy, 
pain, etc.” 

Asura : Am, life, ra to take away; he who takes- 
away life. Life {am) ireans the real nature, i.e. , the 
imprisonment (Bandha ) as expressed in a Sfttra (Sh-SQ., I, 
2) which says, “ Knowledge is imprisonment.” ‘Know¬ 
ledge ’ means, according to the second Sotra (of the same) 
not recognising the reality in the Self, and recognising 
the reality in what is not-self. This word Bhanda is also 
well known by the word Anavamala. (Vide the Com. 
No. 354.) 

The S'iva Sfttras (I, 5, 6 and 21) say, “The effort 
( Udyama ) is called Bhairava; when united with Sfokti 
chakra, the involution of the universe comes. When 
S'akti is united, the creation of the body comes to exist. 
When the Bhttta is united, the separation of the Bhtltas, 
the composition, etc., of the universe come.” The Vartikas 
on the above Sfltras are as follow: “ From the Seff- 
Knowledge of vimarm aspect (of Devi), who is tended 
towards creation, comes out an effort quickly ( Udyama ) 
with complete egoism (Parnaharnbfidva) agitated within, 
merging in the reflective self ( Pratibha ). That Udyama 
is called by the derivative name Bhairava, because he is 
completely equi-poised with all other S'aktis, he is all-per¬ 
vading, he is the consumer of all the armies of the different 
modifications (of the mind). That Udyoga, by name 
Bhairava, as said above of Svasamvit, has a great S'akti 
which is above the order or otherwise, standing entirely in 
its own cMtmkti, powerful to overcome the armies (duali¬ 
ties), in the void as well as shaped forms, . . . United 
with S'akti chakra means realisation as said before. When 
that process is performed, involution of the Universe from 
Kalagni begins and Kola remains in the state of the fire of 
Svasamvit. S'akti : His S'akti as described (in the S'i.- 
Sn., I, 13) is Ichchtt S'akti, Until ,; is united, is meditated 
upon ; the effect of the meditation gives power to create 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


65 


any body as he wishes, etc. Bh'das : Bhtltas are the body, 
Buddhi and Pr?.na, which are the grasjjers of the object, 
and immovable things which are to be grasped. United, 
nourished; separation, parting with them owing to dis¬ 
ease, etc. All these and other things come to a Yogi when 
he realises Sakti.” 

Just as virility is latent in boyhood and manifests 
itself in youth, the various powers (S'aktis) that are in the 
JJva, remain latent by reason of ignorance. When an 
effort is made all these shine forth. This is the purport 
of the above quotation. (24) 

66. Attended by herds of elephants conducted by 
Sampatkarl. (Sampatkarl samarQdka sindhura vraja sevitS.) 

Sampatkarl is the name of a certain deity about whom 
the Svatantratantra says, “There is a certain Vidya called 
Sampatkarl of unimaginable power . . . thus it is three- 
syllabled and I will .explain to you the method of using it.” 
This goddess is described in the Lalitopakhyiina as the 
Mistress of the elephants belonging to Devi. “ The god¬ 
dess named Sampatkarl sprang from the elephant-goad of 
the Supreme Lalita . . . she rode upon the elephant named 
‘ Ranakolilhala ’ (delighting in war) . . . Millions of the 
finest elephants followed her.” 

Sindhura, elephants. There are many kinds of ele¬ 
phants, i.e., Bhadra, Mandra, Mriga, etc. 

Or, Sampatkarl means, the fulness of a joyous state of 
mind. In that emotional state she is attended by herds of 
elephants, i.e., aggregates of objects such as sound, etc. 
In the KMimata we read, “ The objects of the senses are 
(called) elephants, so say the sages of old times . . .” 

The mental modification, having the ability of judging 
distinctly the relations of the objects or the triad 1 appeared 
in one knowledge is known as Sukha Sampa-I.Mrl. The 
Pratyabhijnft (II. Com.) says, “To the ordinary person the 
connection between the receiver and the thing received 
1 The triad is the knower, the knowing and the tiling known. 



€6 


tALITA SAHASKANAMA 


seems natural, but the peculiarity of Yogins is that 
they carefully discriminate between the two.” This 
is made clear by YaradarUja in his commentary on 
the S'iva Sutras (I, 191, “ Worldly joy and ecstatic bliss ” 
{Lokdnandah and SamUdhi mkham ). It is this : “ When a 
man realises that the objects of senses are his own mental 
ideas, his last (mental) state ( Turlya ) reappears ; ” and 
further adds, “ that this state ( turlya) may again disappear 
and reappear. This state of Union called Sampatkarl is 
permanent only with great yogins.” 

67. Surrounded by many crores of horses conducted 
by As’varUdha. (As'varUdhadhishtitas’vakoti kotibhi rfcwita.) 

AswarUdha is a certain goddess well-known in the 
Tantras ; her Mantra is composed of thirteen syllables and 
she is the mistress of the horses of Devi. The Brahmanda 
Pr. says, “ As'varttdha sprang from the noose of Lalita, and 
rode in front with great speed ... a horse called 
apar&jita, and crores of swift horses followed her.” In 
Tripurasiddhanta the explanation of the name is given. 
“As she is the mistress of the horses she is called 
agv&rudho,.” 

Or the senses are called horses. In a certain Sutra of the 
Kadimata, we are told that the senses are meant by the 
word horses. Arudha rider (of horses) the controller of 
the senses, i.e., mind. Because mental modifications arise 
through the senses. Thus one (yogi) enjoys pleasures 
governing countless sense-impressions by a single mind. 
If we take the word arvdha as a plural form (riders) the 
meaning is that she (Devi) directs endless sense-impres¬ 
sions in many minds simultaneously. The meaning is 
that if a Yogi realises his divine self as said above and 
develops the power called Udyama, he becomes at his will 
master of everybody. So say the S'iva Sutras (I, 12) 
“ Yismayo YogabhUmika ” (a wonder is the step of Yoga). 

The commentary explains it thus : “ Just as amaze¬ 
ment arises in excessive joy, so also to the Yogi, there is 



tiiilTA SAHASKAiJAMA 


6 ? 


always amazement in perceiving whatever, is to be known. 
Vismaya is that wisdom, perfect contentment in the 
supreme Self, whose senses are merged in the enjoyment of 
unparalelled. bliss. The wonder ( Vismaya ) of the Yoga 
which leads to the supreme reality, has degrees (Bhumilc&) { 
this indicates that the supreme rest is to be attained 
gradually.” 

A second Sfttra (I, 13) runs : “ Ichchas'aktih Uma 
KurnSrl.” (The energy of desire is Uma, the unmarried). 
The commentary : “ The eternal state is his whose mind 

has ascended the degrees of Yoga called Vismaya, and who 
reajises by Yoga the supreme Bhairavata (an aspect of 
S'iva). To that Yogi the energy of desire comes by degrees, 
that energy is called Par&bhatt&rik& (Supreme Queen). 
She is known as the ‘ unmarried ’ {Kum&ri). As play, 
she creates the Universe from Sad&s/iva to the Earth (36 
Tatvas) ; hence she is Kum&ri. Or, she destroys ( m&rayate ) 
the ground {Ku) of the great illusion, (hence she is Kum&ri). 
Kum&ri is enjoyer of everything. Kum&ri is not to be 
enjoyed by the Yogi who is the Bhairava himself, who can 
enjoy everything (except Kum&ri) as she is one with the 
enjoyer. Kum&ri is Um&, She who has renounced all 
attachment and is chiefly devoted to the lord. Such is the 
Ichch&^akti, in Yogins ; this is the easy path discovered by 
the great teachers (Anuttarades'ikas ). ’ ’ 

A third Stltra (I, 14) is " Dris'yam S'ariram ”. (The 
body is visible.) Com. : " Thus to the Yogi who possesses 
the powerful energy of desire, whatever he sees be¬ 
comes his body ; seeing all as himself without separateness, 
through his likeness to S'iva ; thus in the body externally 
and everywhere, whatever is visible is the body of the Yogi 
and his body is whatever is visible.” 

The fourth Sfttra (III, 14) says, " Yathii tatra tatha- 
anyatra ” (whatever is there is everywhere). Com. : ” Just 
as in the natural body self-dependence is manifest, so also 
the Yogin’s self-dependence is manifested in the bodies 



68 


lAlita sahasranama 


of others. The self-dependence of the devoted Yogin is 
the fulness of individuality.” (25) 

68. Seated in the chariot named Chakraraja, she is 
armed with all the weapons. (Chakraraja ratharfidha 
SarvSyudha parishkrita.) 

Chakraraja : several kinds of chariots are mentioned 
in the Laiitopakhyana, of which Chakraraja is one. Kiri- 
chakra and Geyachakra are examples of other sorts. The 
following is a description of the Chakraraja chariot : 

“ The best of chariots, Chakraraja, which belongs to the 
great queen, which consists of nine angles and which is ten 
Yojanas in height and four in circumference, moved on 
with its Ananda flag. Gltichakra which is the next best, 
which has huge wheels and seven angles, was occupied by 
Mantrin'ithft ; Kirichakra which is considered one of the 
best chariots, which too has seven angles, was also there. 
Listen, 0 wise one ! to the names of its deities. Listen¬ 
ing to their names would bring you victory. Where the 
chariot Chakraraja was, Geyachakra was also there, and 
where the Geya chariot stood, there the Kirichakra was 
also Seen. These three chariots seemed like the three 
animated worlds.” 

Or, Chakraraja may also be taken to mean S'rlchakra. 
All the weapons Devi possesses all the means of attain¬ 
ing the knowledge of Self. These means are explained in 
S'aiva Sfitras as Anavopava, Saktopaya, SAmbhavopaya, 
etc. Yoga Sastras also refer to these means of attaining 
the knowledge of Self. In all these by the S'rlchakra is 
meant that which is pointed to as the pathway to knowledge. 
The Yoga Stttra has the following : “ If you concentrate 

on the inner apex of the nose what remains there for 
you in the right, the left and central paths ? ” That is to 
say, when the Siddhi is attained (when the S'rlchakra is 
reached) there is nothing more left for you to gain by 
Yoga practice. S'rlchakra is the highest point to which 
Yoga practices can lead. 



LAllTA SAhASRAKAMA 


69 


Or Chakrarttjaratha may be taken as <pne word mean-^ 
ing the Siddhi called Chakres'atva, or power of controlling 
the Chakras. Arudha : capable of conferring; Sarvd- 
yndha : all the rites. The Bh.-Gita says (IY, 33) : All 
rites, 0 Partha, are included in knowledge ” ; knowledge 
means S'uddhavidya. The S'iva Sutra (I, 22) says : “ The 
dawn of S'uddhavidya implies success in the mastery of 
the Chakras.” The commentary on this passage runs 
thus : “ When not desiring limited powers he is prompt¬ 

ed by a broad view to embrace all things in himself, 
his knowledge develops and S'uddhavidya dawns. It is 
then he attains mastery over all the Chakras. When the 
Yogi develops the power or capacity for embracing all 
things in himself and has touched the feet of Sadas'iva, 
he realises by the pure knowledge of S'uddhavidya which 
knows not the difference of Aham and Idam, ‘ I ’ and 
‘this,’ that the Lord is both within and without him. 
Thus the eternal idea that ‘ I am the whole universe ’ is 
pure and stainless (S'uddha) knowledge (Vidya). When 
this idea is developed and he is merged in it he, for ever, 
recovers his own Chit-s'akti. When by complete absorp¬ 
tion in Devi the Yogi does so, he attains supreme lordship 
over the Chakras.” 

69. She is attended by mantrini who rides the 
chariot Geyachakra. (Geyachakraratharddha mantrini 
parisevita). 

Mantrini - is another name for Syamala Devi, the 
dusky-coloured deity. 

Geyachakra: Gey a, to be praised ; Chakra , wheel; 
Ratha, the disk of the sun. The sun’s chariot is praised 
in the scriptures ; {aide Tai.-Ar., Chap. I). Those who 
ride the Geyachakra are Yogins devoted to S'rividya. They 
are called Mantrinis. Those who have reached Sftryaloka, 
meditate on Devi to enable them to ascend to higher planes. 

Again ; Geyachakra: Geya, important; Chakra, 
S'richakra ; Ratha chariot; Arudha, contemplated upon. 



70 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


^Tripurasurularl whose chariot is that important Chahra, 
vis., S'richakra, is contemplated upon. The person that 
does so obtains the power of the Mantra, i.e., becomes a 
Mantrinl. When he realises, he obtains the power of 
using the Mantra, which is described in Tantraraja and 
which has to be learnt from a Guru. The Siva Sfitra 
(I, 23) says : “By concentrating upon Mahahrada the 
power of the Mantra is obtained.” (Com.) Mah&hrada, 
the supreme divine energy (S'akti) ; concentration (Anusan- 
dhana), realisation of identity with Sakti; the power of the 
Mantra (Mantravlrya), the perception of the fulness of 
individuality ; obtaining (Anubhava), full development 
of such perception.” The above passage from S'iva 
Slltra is explained at length by the holy Kshemar&ja in 
his commentary 1 wherein he states that the development 
of the Vidya-body is the secret of Mantras (II, 3). (20) 

70. She is preceded by DandanStlia who rides her 
chariot Kirichakra. (Kirichakraratharttdha dandanatha- 
puraskrita.) 

Kirichakra , Kiri, a boar. The chariot called Kiri¬ 
chakra is of the form of a boar. It may also mean that it 
is drawn by boars. DandanMM is the goddess Varahi. 
The Tripurasiddhanta says, “ She is called Dandanfitha 
because she always carries a rod (Danda) in her hand.” 

Kirichakra: Kiri, beams of the light ( Kiranas) of 
Creation ; Chakra, the cycle of creation, preservation and 
destruction. Even though the Yogi has mounted the 
chariot Kirichakra, i.e., even though he is entangled in the 
cycle of Creation, Preservation and Destruction, he is 
(Apuraskrita) beyond the scope, reach or touch of Danda¬ 
natha (Yama or Death) ; he is not subject to death or 
destruction. The S'iva SQtra (III, 33) says : “ Though 

1 Catalogus Catalogorum mentions five commentaries on S'iva 
Sutras :—One by an unknown author ; another by K she mar a j a, 
called S’iva Sutravjmaras'inI; a third by Bhaskara, called Vartika ; 
a fourth by Varadaraja which is frequently quoted in this com¬ 
mentary ; and a fifth by one Rajanakarama. 



LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 


71 


subject to the cyclic law, he is not excluded from the state , 
of self-experience.” The holy Krishnadasa Comments upon 
this passage thus : “ Although the Yogi is involved in 
the incessantly revolving cycle of Creation, Preservation 
and Destruction, if, in virtue of his spiritual attainments, 
he steadfastly clings to the higher path fof Yoga), he does 
not forfeit the state of self-experience, which leads to the 
highest or Turlya Condition.”' 

71. She resides in the centre of the fortress of fire 
constructed by Jvalamalini. (Jvfilamalinikakshipta vahni 
prakara madhyaga.) 

Jvalamalini is the Nitya deity of the fourteenth day of 
the lunar month. In the Brabmanda Pr. Devi addresses 
Jvalamalini thus : “ 0 Child ! Fire is ,thy form, Fire is 
thy body. Do thou protect the great army. Do thou 
construct a fortress of Fire which shall cover the earth and 
extend over a hundred Yojanas in circumference, and thirty 
Yojanas in height.” 

Jvala, fire ; Mala, garland ; Akshipia, destroying ; 
Vahniprakara, sparks of fire ; Madhyaga, he who is seated 
in the midst. 

It was said that though the Jnani or wise man, is 
subject to the cyclic law of creation, preservation and 
destruction, yet there is no break, in his experience of 
unity with self. This seeming inconsistency, is explained 
by this name. 

As a seer, he is in the midst of a blaze of fire 1 which 
destroys the darkness of ignorance. And as a creator, he 
is in the midst of sparks fVahniprakara) which are thrown 
forth. He is like one who, standing between two comba¬ 
tants, is himself unaffected. Though by the actions of 
Creation, etc., modifications arise, yet he remains unchang¬ 
ed. The Span da S'astra (Karika 14) says : “There are two 
states or conditions (Avasthas), action and energy. The 
one ( i.e ., action) perishes, while the other is imperishable. 

1 Jv&lam&la, lit., garland of fire. 



72 


LALITA SAHA8KANAMA 


Effort directed towards action may be Stopped ; when that 
effort ceases, the ignorant man thinks, that he is himself 
asleep. But his inner self which is the seat of omniscience 
never sleeps, though others may, for want of perception in 
themselves, believe it to be asleep.” This means that 
though action manifested as the universe in the form of 
sparks, flame, etc., perishes, the wise man who is in the fire 
of consciousness, who is the brightness of the fire and who 
is brightness itself, never perishes. 

But supposing the energy of S'iva, does not ceai& to 
exist, although his actions perish, what becomes of the 
aspiring Yogi ? This S'iva Sutra (III, 26) says, “ He becomes 
one with S'iva.” Hence there is no room for the above 
question. Another Sutra till, 31) says, “The universe 
is an aggregate of his energies.” The commentator explain¬ 
ing this Stitra writes : “ His energies constitute the 

universe. He who possesses these energies is called Mahes 1 - 
vara. Agamas state, everything is (due to) the aggregation 
of his energies.” This applies to S'iva, to him who is the 
same as Siva, and to him who is aspiring to become S'iva. 1 

Or, JvalamalipiM, the five angles of S'akti; Kshipta , 
equally partaking of the essence ; Vahniprak&ra , the four 
angles of S'iva ; Madhyaga, residing at the centre in the 
form of Bindu. Yoginihridaya (I, 8) says : “ When (Devi) 
had created the five energies, and (S'iva) the four fires, the 
Chakra (S'richakra) came into existence by their union.”(27) 
72. She is delighted at the activity of the S'aktis that 
are prepared to destroy the army of Bhanda. (Bhanda 
sainyavadhodyukta s'akti vikrama harshita.) 

• S'aktia, Nakuli and other goddesses. 

Or, Bhanda, the fettered soul ; army, ideas of duality, 
etc., corresponding to the nature of a fettered soul ; S’aklis 
are the energies or ideas of non-duality, that are prepared 
to destroy the former. Devi is delighted at the onset of 
these ideas of non-duality. For, when a man enjoys even- 
1 According to another reading, it applies also to • the great Yogin’. 



LAXltA SAHASRANAMA 73 

bilt a small portion of (true) bliss, the v^iil (of ignorance) 
is destroyed. The S'akti Sfltra 1 says : ‘ When a person 
does not recognise it, he gets bewildered' by his own 
energies, and is involved in Samsara.” When a person does 
not recognise the existence of his own five powers of actibn ( 
the energies, or more correctly, the three Yoga states called 
Khecharl; Dikcharl and Bhflchari take advantage of his 
weakness. These energies have two aspects, subjective 
(Pas'ubhQmika) and objective (Patibhflmika) and according¬ 
ly manifest themselves, in man, both internally and exter¬ 
nally. The commentary on the Sutra, quoted above, ex¬ 
plains this point well. These energies should be killed 
out, by other energies because they are hindrances to the 
progress of the aspirant. The next Sfltra says : “ When he 
recognises it and his thoughts converge inwardly to the seat 
of the mind, he becomes self-conscious.” Thoughts here 
mean the modifications of the mental energy. 

73. She rejoices at beholding the rising valour of the 
Nityas. (Nitya parakramatopa nirlkshana samutsukfi.) 

The Nityds are the fifteen DevatSs, KamesVari to 
Chitra, who preside over the fifteen days of the lunar 
month. Their Mantras are given differently in the 
Jnanarnava and in the Tantrariija. 

The rising valour of the Nityas : this is in reference to 
the prowess of the Nityas displayed in destroying fifteen of 
the leaders of armies, Damanaka, Chitragupta, etc. 

Or, Nityas, the eternal energies of one's soul ; Rising 
valour (ParSkramatopa), continual progress. Once developed 
the germ of knowledge in the inner soul continues to 
increase. The Yogavasishtha says: “All human arts 
perish by non-use, but the germ of wisdom once risen (in 
the heart) is never destroyed, but continues to grow.” (28) 

74. She rejoices in the valour of Bala, (who was) 
ready to slay the sons of Bhanda. (Bbanda putra vadho- 
dyukta bala vikramanandita.) 

1 These S&tras are not yet printed. 

10* 



u 


LAL1TA SAHASRAHAMA 


The sons of Bhanda were thirty in number, vie., 
Chaturbahu, to Upamilya. Bala a goddess nine years 
old. The, BrahmAnda Pr. says : “ On bearing them, i.e., 
the exploits of the arms of her daughter, Devi was 
delighted.” 

75. She is delighted at the destruction of Vishanga 
effected by mother Mantrinl. (MantrinyambA virachita 
vishanga vadhatoshitA.) 

Mantrinl, S'yAmal'imbj. Vishanga and Vittukrq, are 
the two brothers of Bhanda. The BrahmAnda Pr. ^ys : 
•“ Once BliandAsura, the head of the Asuras, desired to 
create different kinds of Asuras. From his right shoulder 
he created Vis'ukra, who was able to protect the company 
of the Daityas and who was equal to S'ukra (the Guru of 
Asuras in the matter of counselling), and from his left 
shoulder, he created Vishanga.” f29) 

76. Rejoicing in the strength of Varahi, the taker of 
the- life of Vis'ukra. (Vis'ukraprAnaharana varShivirya 
nandita.) 

. • Varahi, a goddess, by name Dandini. The Tripura 

siddhAnta explains the word Varahi as follows : “ Because 
Devi, the Supreme, appeared to VarahAnandanAtha (one of 
the Gurus who was devoted to Devi), and because she has 
the face of a boar, she is called Varahi.” 

The Sons of Bhanda (No. 74) are the staing, 
called Anava, and others mala (impurities); Vishanga 
(No. 75) Vi, opposed to, Sanga, attachments, or the 
craving for worldly objects. Or, Visha poison ; ga, 
to go ; i.e., perceiving sensuous objects with a poisoned 
view. Hence Kshemaraja, commenting on the S'iva 
SUltra fill, 30, Yovishastho-jnAhetuscha) beginning with, 
Yovishayastha, etc., explains that the word Avts/ia 
refers to Mahes'vari and other energies that are opposed to 
Visha, i.e., poison, evil. etc. Vitukra : Vi opposed to ; 
sukra, Tejas, or light, i.e., the embodied soul. Or, Vi 
more, S'uk pain ; ra receive ; i.e., SamsSra. 



LALITA 8AHASRANAMA 


75 


Bdla (No. 74), mantrinl (No. 79), VarOhl arid 
(No. 76) represent certain internal modifications, -when these 
destroy the opposed tendencies (indicated in the.names of 
74, 75 and 76) his own divine Self becomes pleased. 

It is said in the S'akti Sritra, “ When he obtains strength 
(Bala) he makes the universe his own.” The commentary 
on the above says, “ Bala, (universal) consciousness ; 
obtaining becoming merged in it. The Universe appears 
as identical with himself.” The S'iva Sfltra (III, 42) says, 
“ #hen, by true knowledge of reaching that, by killing 
that, JIva is destroyed.” Com. That, the frequently 
entered abode which is the reality of knowledge (or 
according to another reading, the place of realisation) ; 
reaching, lead the true knowledge, i.e., the mind reaching 
forward to and devoted to the above abode. Killing thati 
the glazing the strong desire of the man who is stained by 
anavamaki. Consequently the embodiment Jivatva also 
perishes. 

77. S’ri Ganes'vara was formed by her glances at 
’KJmes'vara. (Kames'vara mukhlloka kalpita S'rl Ganes'vara). 

Seeing the Devas fettered by magical figures set up by 
the Daityas, Devi, by merely looking at her husband, gave 
birth to the great Ganapati whose (mantra is).the twenty- 
eight syllables, by which the fettering influence of the 
magical figures was destroyed and the Devas released. Thus! 
says the Brah. Pr. : “Then Devi LalitS looking again at.the 
face of her Lord, smiled, and from the rays of that smile a 
certain god arose, having the head of an elephant with 
ichor flowing from the temples.” ' 

. Or, it has just been said that the embodied Soul was 
destroyed, but since it is eternal this is impossible. To 
remove this doubt this name, concerning 'he destruction of 
the soul (the vehicle of the soul, i.e., ttjaihi) is introduced, 

Kdtne 'vara, is the pure Siva without attributes'; 
Glances, personal knowledge (of him) ; Ganewara : Gm\a 
the city formed of eight things ( Puryashtaka ,) consisting: 



76 


LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


of (1) five Karmendriyas, (2) five Jnanendriyas, (3) four 
Manas, etc., (4) five Pranas, (5) five Bhfttas, (6) K&ma, (7) 
Karma, and (8) avidyd ; and If vara the lord; Kalpita, 
attributed. 

The word .Jlva 1 means the man possessed of the idea 
of egotism and of the idea that he directs the Puryastaka. 
When these ideas are destroyed by his knowledge of the 
(true) lord of the Puryashtaka, which knowledge is created 
by ascertaining the true nature of his own self, then, as 
there are no qualities there is nothing to be qualified. ‘ a 

The S'iva stltra (III, 42) says,, “When the wearer of the 
garment formed of the (five) elements is released, he again 
becomes supreme and equal to the Lord.” Com. “ 6y 
the extinction of attachment, as described above, the JXva 
(his embodiment) is destroyed, by removing the idea of the 
direction of the Puryashtaka and he is wholly released from 
the seat of egotism together with the elements which caused 
the origin of his body and no longer affect him, like one 
who wears a garment and attains Nirvana (emancipation) 
hence he becomes equal to the supreme Lord. Having 
entered into the substance of reality, the essence of con¬ 
sciousness and bliss, and thus being entirely filled, he 
becomes that (reality) itself.” 

This is confirmed by a S'akti S'utra which says : 
“ When a man attains consciousness and bliss {.chit and 
ananda), though body, life, etc., appear, he attains the firm 
union with the (Universal) consciousness and (hence) 
emancipation (Jtvanmukti).” Another S'akti Stltra says, 
“ This (.Universal) consciousness and bliss are obtained by 
developing the mean {Madhyavikasa)." This (word) 
Madhyavikasa means the great Ganem which is mentioned 
in (No. 78). The manner of developing the mean 
( Madhyavikasa ) is said in the succeeding Stltra to be “ by 
the destruction of doubt ”. These words, by the destruction 

1 The meaning is that when the Jiva is absorbed in Brahman, there 
is no longer any Jiva remaining as such. 



LALITA BAHASRANAMA 


77 


of doubt, are indicated in the text by looking at the face of 
KtXmetvara, Delighted (harshitd) which comes in the next 
name (No. 78) is indicated .by the above Sutra attainment of 
consciousness of bliss ; for further explanation of the above, 
the reader is referred to the Partyabhijnahridaya. (30) 

78. She is delighted at the great Ganes'a’s breaking 
the obstacle formed of the magic figure. (Mahaganes'a 
nirbhinna vighnayantra praharshita.) 

The Magic Figure named Jayavighna (obstruction to 
victory) which had eight angles and eight tridents, was 
defended by eight devatas, vis., Alasa and others, was 
inscribed on a stone slab two Kros'as (four miles) in extent 
and thrown by Vis'ukra on the army of Devi. It was 
broken into pieces by MahSganes'a. This is described well 
in the Lalitop;tkhyilna. 

79. She is showering missiles in response to the 
Aveapons thrown by Bhandasura. (Bliandasurendra nir- 
mukta s'astra pratyastra varshinl.) 

According to Dhanurveda, the difference betAveen 
S'astra and Astra is as folloAvs : S'astra is that Avith which 
one strikes his enemies. It is always held in hand. Astra 
is that which is thrown out, or discharged by the hand, as 
the arrow of a bow. 

Names 78 and 79 are also explained as follows : Maha- 
ganes'a, is the mastery over Puryashtaka or the city of 
eight things. It means the realisation of self. The magic 
figure of Vis'ukra and the missiles of Bhandasura, refer to 
the different modifications of nescience (Avidya); and 
“ Devi shoAvering missiles ” means the continuance of the 
act of realising the supreme individuality. (31) 

80. From the nails of her (ten) fingers sprang the ten 
forms of Narayana. (Karanguli nakhotpanna narayanadas'a 
kritih.) 

Nails, joints of the nails, or finger tips. Ten forms 
(,Das’a +Akritih) of Narayana are the ten incarnations of 
Vishnu, viz.. Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-lion, Dwarf, 



78 


LALITA SAHA8BANAMA 


Paras'urama, Rama, BalarSma, Krishna and Kalki. The 
Daityas sprung into existence from the missile called 
SarvasurSstra, which was aimed by Bhandasura, were, 
Somaka, Havana, Bali, Hiranyaksha and others who were 
known to have fought, several battles, had their origins 
thus. In order to destroy these Daityas, Devi created from 
her finger ends the ten incarnations of Vishnu (Matsya, 
Kfirma, etc.) in regular order from her right thumb to the 
left small finger. The following is from the Lalitopakhyana 
where it is well described : “ From the right thumb hail of 
the great Queen there sprang *the divine, all-pervading 
Nftrilyana in the form of a great fish. . . . The ten 

Avataras having performed their respective onerous tasks, 
stood with folded hands before Mother Lalita saluting 
her.” 

Or, Ten forms : the word in the text is Das'Skritih, 
which may also be taken to mean the five states (Dasft) of 
Jlva and the five functions (Kritih) of Is'vara. The 
five states of Jlva are Waking, Dreaming, etc., and 
the five functions of Is'vara are Creation, Preservation, 
etc. 

81. She burnt up the army of Daityas with the fire 
of the astra called Mahlpis'upata. (MahUplkupatastragni 
nirdagdhasura sainika.) 

This MahapQ, mpata Mantra is different from the six- 
syllabled pa tupat&stra mantra. The former belongs to 
Sadas'iva and the latter to Is'vara. The Linga Pr. says, 
“ From Rudra to Pisachas are called Pastas, as Siva is the 
lord of these, he is called Patupati (lord of Pakus).” 
Heiice this mantra belongs to Sadas'iva. 

Or, The fire of Mahdpdmpata weapons, the highest 
mental modifications connected with non-duality, which 
arise progressively according to the progressive practice 
(of the devotion). 

The army of the Daityas, the mental modifications, 
connected with ignorance. , . (32) 



LALITA HAHASBANAMA . 79 

82. BhamlSsura with his army was hurried up by the 
fire of the (weapon of) Kames’vara. (Kames’varagni 
nirdagdha sabhamjasura sainika.) 

With his army. According to another reading, with 
his town called S'rmyaka. 

This weapon of Kanietvara is more powerful than the 
one mentioned in the preceding name. 

The Brah. Pr. says, “ The supreme Mother, Lalita 
blazing with anger, and throwing the whole universe 
into confusion, suddenly rendered lifeless, with the great 
weapon of Kames'a shining like the sun, the mighty Asura, 
the > fierce and wicked Bhanda who was left alone, all his 
relations being slain. By flames discharged from that 
weapon his city called S'tiny aka (emptiness) with the 
women, children, cattle, and wealth, was suddenly burnt 
up. and its site alone remained ; thus the city became 
empty and its name {S'iaiyaka) was justified.” 

Or, having described up to this (name) the condition 
of equality with S'iva of him who has attained the 
last stage {S'&ynjya) of the emancipation of the divine 
Self, while in this present life, he now shows that Siva 
alone remains (i.e., he becomes S'iva himself) after the 
destruction, by the knowledge of the Self, of the condition 
brought about by Pr&rabdha (the Karma which began 
its operation in the present body), with the subtle body, 
etc., which is then like a burned cloth, a mere appearance 
of duality. 

The fire of Kctmewara, the fire of consciousness, 
because he is the universal object of desire. The S'ruti 
also (Bra.-Up., II, 4-5) says, “ For the sake of the Self 
everything is dear.” BhmtdCbSura, the state of Jlva 
(individuality) ; the cause of the appearance of duality ; 
the army, the subtle body, etc. ; or according to another 
reading S'vnyaka (emptiness) the appearance of duality 
as is seen in a burned cloth ; or it applies to the empti¬ 
ness, or unreality of the Atheistic School of duality. 



80 LALITA SAHASKANAMA 

When that state of SamsAra (Jivabhava) which appears 
to the devotee as void, is removed, himself remains, as 
consciousness alone. 

83. Her supreme power is praised by Brahma, Vishnu, 
Mahendra and others (deities). (Brahmopendra mahend- 
radi deva samstuta vaibhava.) 

The Brah. Pr. says, “ On that occasion all the devas 
headed by Brahma and Vishnu, delighted at the destruc¬ 
tion of Bhanda, came to wait upon her, etc.” 

Or, Samstuta, (praised) realised in themselves ; 
Vaibhava, infiniteness and Omnipresence of the self. (33) 

84. She was the life-giving medicine to Manmatha 
who was burnt up by the fire from the eye of Siva. 
(HaranetrSgni sandagdba kilrna sanjivanaushadhib.) 

The eye : the third eye of S'iva. 

In the Brahm. Pr. occurs this story of how Devi 
who had enchained even her husband (S'iva) though he 
had renounced (the world) at the prayer of Brahma, 
etc., restored Manmatha, to life. This agrees with the 
saying, “ Children rebuked by the father are consoled 
by the mother.” Similarly the Brahma Vaivarta Pr. says, 

“ If Hari becomes angry, the Guru is the protector, but 
if the Guru becomes angry there is no one Rf protect.” 
But it may be said, since here Hari is the deity to be 
worshipped, Paramas'iva should be the saviour from the 
anger of Devi since he is the highest Guru, and without 
exception (because S'iva is called Adinatha, the first : 
Guru). This is wrong, because Paramas'iva also is one 
of the devotees of Devi and the devotee requires a Guru, 
hence Tripurasundarl must be his Guru; and in the 
Yoginihridaya (III, 211) S'iva says to PArvati, “ O 
noble Lady, (this knowledge) should not be given indis¬ 
criminately to atheists. Thus by you, who art in the 
form of my Ichcba, was I commanded.” To every effort 
desire is cause, Devi is the well-known cause of S'iva’s 
activity and she is his Guru, hence one of her names is 



LAI.1TA SABASKANAMA 


81 


“ in the form of Guru ” (No. 603). The Chatus's'atl 
SUstra says, “ Without S'akti S'iva has iihjther name nor 
abode.” According to the Tantras, S'iva became the first 
Guru (Adinatha), because he possesses the Ichchas'akti. 
Therefore, there is no need to ask whether Devi is 
included in the circle of the Gurus, or whether she is 
superior to S'iva, the first Guru. So the Mahasvachanda- 
tantra says, “ Sadiis'iva himself standing as both Guru and 
Pupil promulgated the Tantras in the form of question and 
answer.” The word himself (Svayameva ) means, by divid¬ 
ing his real and manifested forms {Prakava and Vimarm) 
he became both Guru and Pupil. Suggesting and 
questioning were the part of Devi, and teaching and 
responding, that of S'iva. To express the above, S'iva 
speaks (in the Yoginthridaya (HI, 211) of Devi as “ in the 
form of his Ichcha,” and addresses her as “ Noble Lady ”. 
Really speaking, (among the ranks of Gurus) next to 
Adinatha (S'iva, the first Guru) is counted Adis'akti, and 
Adinatha is second to none. There is no authority for 
taking either of those two as the first, but Adis'akti united 
with Adinatha, should be taken in the second rank, as she 
is the teacher of the third Guru, Sadas'iva by name (i.e., 
among the ranks of Gurus, first is Adinatha, second 
Adis'akti, and third Sadas^va). 

Or, Hara, taking the real nature of the Self ; Neta, 
leader ; fire, causing forms to change ; that is to say the 
root of ignorance (mftlajnana) ; burned by that, Kama, the 
embodied soul whose real nature is S'iva ; Sanjlvana : 
Sam, entirely—getting rid for ever of the veil (of maya), 
and jlvana, the attainment of his own real nature ; 
medicine, i.e., Devi is the means to attain one’s own real 
nature. The meaning is that Moksha is the attainment of 
one’s own real nature, through the worship of that which 
is in the form of vidya and by getting rid of avidya. 
Before burning, Manmatha was embodied, afterwards he 
was living without a body ; this illustration shows that the 
11 * 



82 


LAL1TA SAHASBANAMA 


jlvan which were before Brahman, became embodied 
through the influence of nescience ; when he has got rid of 
that influence, he has no longer any body and becomes one 
with Brahman. This (idea) is also contained in the last 
S'iva Stttra (III, 46), “ The union already described again 
occurs.” Com. “union (Milana), again realising one’s 
own chaitanya ; this occurs to the Yogi who has reached 
the highest stage of Yoga. Again, the attainment of union 
with S'iva is not a new thing for the Yogi, because it is his 
own real nature ; his own nature was hidden by the de¬ 
pravity, brought about by the many material images, raised 
by the power of illusion, and the nature of S'iva becomes 
manifest (in him) when the covering is dispersed by 
following the method taught by the Guru. Thus S'iva 
said.” 

The last S'akti Sfttra also says, “ The attainment of his 
own Divine Nature and the mastery over the chakras.” 

85. Her lotus face represents the divine Vagbhava 
group (a group of syllables in the panchadasi). (S'rimat 
vagbhava ktttaika svartlpa mukhapankaja.) 

Up to this the Supreme form of Devi has been set 
forth by the actions of her physical form such as ‘ the 
slaying of Bhandasura,’ intended to convey a double mean¬ 
ing, because it is subtler than the subtle and therefore 
must be described in an esotric manner, and now her 
subtle form which is inseparable from her physical form 
is described. 

This subtle form has three divisions, subtle, subtler 
and subtlest; the first representing the fifteen syllabled 
Mantra (Panchadasi), the second Kamakaia, and the third 
one Kundalini. 

The first is described under three names :— 

S'rimat (divine) having power of conferring wisdom 
and other exalted powers. Vagbhava, that by which a 
person attains the power of speech. The Vagbhavakuta is 
the group of five syllables. (34) 



I.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


83 


86. From the throat to the waist she represents the 
MadhyaktWa. (Kanihadhahkari paryanta \nadhyaktUas- 
vardpinl.) 

Madhyaksta, Kamaraja ktita, a group of six syllables. 
It is said, “ As Kama (desire to create the universe) resides 
in thy heart (thy mantra of the 2nd part ) is called Kama¬ 
raja. 0, Amba, as thou art about to create (the universe), 
the next (3rd part], is called S'aktiktKa.” 

87. From the waist downwards she represents S'akti- 
kG/a. (S'akti ktttaikata pannakatfyadhobhagadharinl.) 

S'akti is so called because it is the S'akti of the wise. 
This is a group of four syllables. (35) 

’ 88. She is the root Mantra itself. (Mttlamantratmika.) 

Mala root, this is the fifteen syllabled mantra, Pan- 
chadavl, it is the root of the four objects of human desires 
( Purushdrthas) : Mantra, man repetition ; tra protection 
—it protects those who repeat it. It is declared, “ Mantra 
is said to be that, with increasing repetition (Manana) 
of which, with full reflection of ‘ I-ness,’ destroys 
one’s transmigratory life (Samsara),- and protects (tra) 
him.” 

89. The three divisions of the root (Mantra) form her 
body. (MOlaklMatraya kalebarS.) 

The three divisions of the Mantra may be taken as . 
forming either her physical or her subtle form. 

Keally the word mala (of the previous and this name) 
means the subtler body called Kamakala. “ The three divi¬ 
sions ” are the parts of Kamakala. This Kamakala with 
its three parts is to be learned from a Guru alone. The 
first part of the Kamakala is (called) tTrdhva bindu (one 
bindu at the top), the next is two crossed bindus and the 
lowest is called hardakdla , These three in order take the 
form of the three groups of the fifteen-syllabled mantra 
and as well as the face aDd other parts (face, throat to waist 
and down the waist) of the physical form (of Devi). The 
N&thacharanagama explains this and the preceding name to 



84 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


indicate the subtler form of Devi, in her collective and 
individual aspects. 

90. She has the special taste of'the nectar of kola. 
(Kulamritaika rasika.1 

After describing the form of Devi, in Brahmdnda, he 
now proceeds to describe her subtlest form called Kunda* 
lint in the Pindanda (in the body). That Kundalini in the 
Mttladhara, sleeping in three and half coils, roused by 
yogins, breaks through the six chakras as well as the three 
knots, called Brahma, Vishnu and Budragranthis, and 
proceeding to the Sahasrara, from the moon’s orb, which 
is the pericarp of the lotus, she causes the nectar to flow ; 
even those who are not Yogins attain all these advantages 
by mere thinking (Bhavand). 

Kula, genus. This has one common knowledge of the 
triad of the known, the knowing and the knowledge. When 
one says ‘ I know the pot,’ there thought alone remains, 
and if that requires another knowledge it is as if one light 
requires another light (to illuminate it). So the triad is 
called Kula. The Chidghanachandrika says, “ Kula is the 
measurer, the thing to be measured and the measuring.” ‘ 
There are thirty-two lotuses (in the body) some facing 
upwards, and some downwards ; these are described in the 
Svachchandasaugraha and other works. Amongst these, 
the lowest one is called akula because it has no connection 
with the triad (measurer, etc.) ; and the other lotuses which 
are above it are called Kulas. (In the Setubandha, the 
same commentator, enumerates twenty-two lotuses with 
their names and their proper places ; but here thirty-two 
lotuses, Vide Yoginlhridaya, I, 27.) 

Or, Ku, earth and la absorption, i.e., Mftladhara, 
because, in it the earth (Tatva) is absorbed. The -road of 
Sushumna is called Kula, because it is connected with the 
Mftladhara. 

The nectar flowing from the Sahasrara is called 
Kuldmrita ; or according to the Svachchandasangraha, 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 85 

“ body is called Kula Kulamrita is so called because it 
is connected with the body. \ 

91. She is the protector of the secrets of the family. 
(Kula sanketa palinl.) 

Kula, the scripture, because it explains and is equal 
to the thought of the worshipper and the object of worship. 
So the Ealpa Sutra (Paras’u, YI, 39) says, “ One should keep 
in secret the Kula scriptures.” The Agamas also say, “ All 
the S'astras enter the Kula ” (»>., explain the object of the 
worship) ; or Kula the (right) conduct; for the Bhavi. 
Utta. Pr. says, “Kula means not family, but right conduct.” 

The Protector : Devi never allows the revealing the 
secret of these two (scripture and right conduct) to the 
ignorant, and makes the thread* (instruction) unbroken by 
revealing it (the secret of the above) to those who follow 
the tradition. The secrets are threefold, viz., the secret of 
the chakra, of the mantra and of worship. (Yoginlhridaya, 
I, 5) says, “ 0 Great ruler, thus Devi Tripura, has the 
threefold secrets.” In the Chintamanistava 1 also it is said, 
“ This family woman (Kundalini) entering the royal road 
(Sushumna ) taking rest at intervals in the secret places (in 
the chakras), embraces the Supreme husband and makes 
the nectar to flow (in the Sahasrara).” (36) 

92. The family woman. (Kulangana). 

Kula the chaste family. She belongs to Such a family. 
The meaning is that the respectable woman is well protect¬ 
ed, so, she also is protected (kept in secret) by the veil of 
avidyCt. The Kularnava says, “ Every other vidya is as 
public as a courtesan but this Kambhavl vidya is protected 
like a respectable woman.” The holy Parakurama also 
says (Kalpa Sutras, I, 30) “ The other vidyas are like 

courtesans, quite public.” _ 

1 The word used is Samyraddi/a, i.e., one who belongs to a parti¬ 
cular established doctrine, which has come by transmitting from 
teacher to student. 

1 This is attributed to Ski Sankarichirva (Vide Burnell’s catalogue 
of Tanjore, No. 190 B. 



LAL1TA SAHASHANAMA 


93. Residing in the Kula. (.Kulantasstha.) 

She is standing between the measurer and the thing 
measured ; or Kula : Scripture, and she is in the midst of 
the scriptures, because she is the object of Knla knowledge. 

94. Belonging to Kula. (Kanlinl.) 

Because she is worshipped in every house, in every 
place, in every body, and in every family ; according to the 
Vis'va, “Kula means, country, house, a collection of things 
belonging to the same species, tribe, and body.” The Bha. 
Utt. Pr. says, “ Devi is to be worshipped, in every place, 
town, house, village, and forest by men who are devoted 
to S'akti.” 

Again, the lower thousand petalled red lotus' is 
also called Kula. The Svachcbandatantra says, “ In the 
pericarp of it, Kula Devi resides and in the petals 
Kulas'aktis.” 

Or, according to the Tantras “ Kula means Skkti, 
akula, S'iva, and union of Kula with Aknla is called 
Kaula." Kaula means the essence common to both S'iva 
and S'akti, hence Devi is called Kaulinl. 

95. Kulayoginl. 

It is commonly said by some that Kaula means offer¬ 
ing worship, etc., to a chakra (mentally) inscribed in ether. 
She is called Kulayoginl because she is connected (Yoga) 
with the chakra just mentioned. 

Nos. 94 & 95 are named as one by the author of the 
ChchalSkshara Stttras. We will explain the reason of it in 
the 10th Hundred. 

96. Having no Kula (Akula). 

The thousand petalled lotus at the base of the Sushumna 
is called akula. The Svachchandasangrah says, “ The 
Sushumna has a thousand petalled lotus, at the top and as 
well as at the bottom ... is a pair of shining lotuses, 0 
ruler, the Kula and akula.” She is called akula 
because she is in the form of akula or her abode is in 
it. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


87 


Or, because she has no family iKula) body, etc., she 
is called a-kula. 

97. Living in the Samaya. (SamaySntasstha.) 

Samaya is commonly (.lit. traditional custom) explain¬ 
ed as offering worship, etc., to a chakra in the ether of the 
heart. That (worship) is unanimously decided by all the 
yogins as the supreme, hence it is called Samaya. Samaya 
also means the five books of Yasishta, Suka, Sanaka, 
Sanandana, and Sanatkumara, because they describe this 
internal worship. 

Or, Samaya : Sama, equality ya, he who attains, i.e., 
both S'iva and Dev!. The equality between Dev! and Siva 
is ’fivefold, vis., equality of place (i.e., chakra, rites, etc., 
are the same), functions (creation, etc.), actions (dancing, 
etc.), name (Siva and Siva, etc.), and form (red complexion, 
etc.). This is explained in detail by Lolla in the comment¬ 
ary on the Vasana Subhagodaya. 1 

Anta (in) means according to the Visva, “corner, 
near, destruction, real nature, and beauty.” She is the real 
nature of these two (heart and the Jive books). 

98. Devoted to the conduct of Samaya. (Samaya- 
charatatpara.) 

SamayOehdra means the conduct described in ten 
chapters of the Rudrayamala. 

Or, when the initiate, through the influence of the 
Guru’s side glance, becomes steady by the practice of either 
the six or the four kinds of union, and ha? been purified 
by the mystical practice called ‘ Mahavedha,’ then on the 
ninth day (Mahanavami of the lunar month) Devi, (Kun- 
dalinl) awakens, leaving the Mfiladhara, and appears to 
him in the Manipttra (chakra). In that chakra she is to be 
worshipped by the ceremonies beginning with i:Odya 
(offering water for the feet) and ending with Bhtlshana 
(decking her with jewels) ; then having led her to AnOhata, 

l This, I suppose, is another name for Gaudapada’s Subhagodaya 
(see also Anandafahar! fTio. 41). 



88 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the ceremonies should be continued to T&mbkla (giving 
betel) ; next having led her to Vifuddhi, she should be 
worshipped, surrounded by the rays of the ChandrakalSs 
which are there ; having led her to Ajnftchakra, the Nira- 
jana ceremony (waving lights before her, this indicates the 
end of the ceremony) should be performed. (Next and 
last) in the thousand petalled lotus in the centre of the 
Saraffha, she should be united with Sadasriva ; then draw¬ 
ing a veil, he should remain in the next house waiting till 
she returns to and enters the MQladh&rakunda. The 
method of effecting this must be learned from a Guru. 
This is what is meant here by Samayach&ra. 

Devoted, She is devoted to these two (the conduct, as 
in the Rudrayamala, and the Sushumna method). <37) 

99. Chiefly residing in the Mfiladhara. (Mfiladharaika 
nilaya.) 

There is a four-petalled lotus called Mhladhara ; in its 
pericarp there is a Madhyabindu, called Kulakunda ; in 
that Kundalinl sleeps, always having her face covered. 
Mvla the root, Odhara, support, the MidadhUra is the root 
of Sushumna and the support of Kundalinl. 

100. Severing the knot called Brahmagrandhi. 
(Brahmagranthivebhedint.) 

Of the six chakras, each has two knots on both sides. 
The Svadhishfhana chakra has three including Brahma- 
granthi. 

Thus ends the second Kala called Tapini, with the first 
hundred names in the work called Saubhagyabhaskara of 
Bhasurananda. 


101. Appearing in the manipflra. (Manipttranta 
rudita.) 

Manipiira chakra is in the navel and there is a ten- 
petalled lotus ; in that while engaged in the act of Samaya 



LATjITA sahaskanama 


worship {Vide under name 98) Devi is decked (pura) with 
gems ( man* ). Hence this chakra is calIed\Mampfira. 
Appearing, by removing the knot (Brahmagranthi) which 
is below this chakra. 

102. Severing the knot called Vlshnngranthi. 
(Vishnugranthi vibhedinl.) 

Above the Manipllra is the knot called Vishnugranthi; 
Severing (Vibhedinl) : Vi —completely and Bheda to break. 
As Vishnu resides in the Maniptlra, this knot is called 
Vishnugranthi. Similarly, the Brahma and Rudragranthis 
are so called, because Brahma and Rudra reside in these 
centres respectively. (38) 

' 103. Residing in the centre of the Ajnachakra. 
(Ajnachakrantaralastha.) 

Between the eye-brows there is a two-petalled lotus ; 
it is called ajndchakra, because in it the Guru, who 
instructs ( ajndi) resides. Or, A, a little ; jna, knowledge, 
i.e., knowledge arises first in him who mentally attains the 
conquest of that chakra. Therefore it is called Apia. 

104. Severing the knot called Rudragranthi. (Rudra- 
granth ivebhedinl.) 

The two Rudragranthis are in the anabata centre of 
the heart. In practice the order is reverse. 

Or, there are four parts (Khandas) in the S'rlvidytX- 
mnntra called respectively, agni, siirya, chandra, and kola, 
also called, Vdgbhava, k&marO. ja, S'akti and Turlya (KtMas) 
( Vide the names 85 to 90). Among these four there are 
three hrillekhas (hrhns) these are called ‘ knots ’ and named 
respectively, Brahma , Vishnu and Rudragrandhis. Sever¬ 
ing means penetrating into. 

In really speaking these six (chakras 94 to 104 names) 
signify the roots or origins (of the universe) as said in the 
fourth chapter of the Dattatreya Samhita. “ Molddhara 
and the other five chakras are together called Kula ; there 
are three knots among them, these three are called Devi 
chakras. The earth and (water) chakras are indicated by 




90 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


the Brahmagranthi. The next t-wo powerful and shining 
chakras are fire and sun ; these two are indicated by the 
Vishnugranthi ; this shining one confers all the siddhis . 
The next two chakras in the form of air and ether are indi¬ 
cated by the Rudragranthi, the seat of mighty benefits.” • 

105. Having ascended the thousand-petailed lotas. 
(Sahasrarambujartldha.) 

This is in the lower part of Brahmarandhra. 

106. Showering down torrents of ambrosia. (Sndha- 
dharabhivarsliini.) 

This ambrosia comes from the moon of the pericarp of 
the lotus. The S'ruti (Tai. Bra., Ill, 12. 3} says, “ Let the 
feet (of Devi) which cause torrents of nectar to flow on all 
sides make us satisfied.” (39) 

107. Brilliant as the lightning flash. (Tatiilekba- 
samaruchih.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Ax., X, 13-2) says, “ Bright as the flash 
of Lightning.” 

108. Residing above the six chakras. (Shatchakropari 
samsthita.) 

Samsthita {Residing): Sam, permanently, sthita, 
residing above the six chakras, viz., MhlSdh&ra, Svadhish- 
thana, Manipttra, Anahata, Vis’uddhi and Ajna. 

109. Greatly attached to festivals. (Mahasaktih.) 

Festival means the union of Siva and S'akti (in the 

Sahasrara), 

Or Malm, tejas ; Asakti, devoted to. 

The Vis'va says, “ Malta means festival and tejas.” 

Or Malmt, greatness. A, on all sides, S'akti , 
attachment. 

110. Kundalinl. 

Kundala means coiled hence Kundalini what is 
coiled. Its own form is like a coiled serpent. The 
Tantraraja says, “ The shining (Tejas) vital energy (Jlva- 
s'akti), which is the manifestation of life (Prana), is called 
Kundalinl, which resides in the centre of the flames of 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 91 

fire of Mftlftdhara. She is sleeping like a serpent, having 
three (and half) coils, radiant, she is ever hissing in the 
centre of sushumna where she resides, in the' head of 
maya. When a man after closing his ears does not hear 
this sonnd he is near to death.” The Yogavasishtha in the 
story of Chhdaia says, “Recognise KundalinI in your 
Self, which is the very life of the mind which is also 
called Purymhtaka, like the scent in the flower.” The 
Devi Pr. explains that, “ She is called KundalinI because 
she has the S'ringafaka form ” (triangle form, and the 
three angles are Ichcha, jndna and Kriya, vide Yoginl- 
bridaya, I, 51 com.) 

* Or, the Yagbhavabhlja is known as KundalinI. 

111. Fine as the fibre of the lotus stock. (Bisatan- 
tutanlyasl.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Ar., X, 13. 2) says, “ Fine as the point 
of an ear of rice, saffron coloured, radiant, and like an 
atom.” 

The names from 90th downwards to this name form 
one group. 

The Yamakes'vara tantra says, “ The S'akti called 
KundalinI in the form of a serpent, beautiful, fine as 
lotus fibre, resides in the mttladbara. Biting the pericarp 
of the MQladhara which is like the pericarp of a lotus, 
with its tail in its mouth and connected with.the Brabma- 
randhra. Seated comfortably in the lotus posture 
(Padmasana) contracting the anus, his mind fixed upon 
Kumbhaka, the aspirant should force the breath upwards. 
By the compression of the breath, the fire in the Svadhis- 
fhana blazes up. By the force of this blaze and by the 
force of the breath, the serpent king (kundalinl) awakes 
and breaks through the knots called Brahma, Vishnu 
and Rudragranthis, as well as the six lotuses ; this 
energy unites with Siva in the thousand-petalled lotus. 
This should be known as the supreme state (para) and 
it is the cause of final beatitude.” 



92 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


The Arunft, Up. (Tai. Ar., I, 27) also says, “ Arise; 
sleep not; ye who rejoice in the light, desire the fire } 
be satisfied (by the nectar) of the king who is with UmS, 
with the help of the hot sun.” Thus the Upanishad 
exclusively refers to Devi. Hence we find in the SfySkmala 
Sahasranama among the thousand names of S'yamala, 
one name is particularised as “ praised by the Arunopani- 
shad.” This is a dialogue between the devotees called 
Pris'nis. Who rejoice, etc., Bh&rata : those who are 
devoted to Sarasvatividya, i.e., the devotees of STividya ; 
arise : persevere in your devotion. Sleep not: do not be 
careless ; or arise : raise (the Kundalinl) ; sleep not, do 
not allow her to sleep. Fire, the fire in the Svadhish- 
fhana, convert this in the form of Kundalini ; desire, 
raise her by the force of your wish. With the help of the 
hot sun, the sun which is between the Anahata, and 
Vis'uddhi chakras accompanied by the fire. Of the king 
who is with Uma, the king of kings (S'iva) with his 
Queen, who is residing in the lunar orb belonging to 
Sahasrara. The meaning is, having raised the KundalinI 
fire and united with the KundalinI sun and leading these 
two into the lunar orb and uniting them through the 
common essence of S'iva and S'akti ; then by the streams 
of ambrosia flowing from this (Union) filling the seventy- 
two thousand channels he becomes satisfied thereby. 

Thus (another S'ruti says) (Tai. Ar., I), “Whatever 
the hissing sound the girl makes, whatever the woman 
(does), and whatever good things, the woman after 
marriage does fire helps.” Girl (Kumarl) : Kti, earth, 
mri, absorption, i.e., Kulakunda (M&l&dh&ra). Kun- 
dalinl is so called because she belongB to Mftladh&ra. 
Kumarl is meant here as a newly born baby, be¬ 
cause KuncfctlinI, is described here with the sound 
of (hissing) crying when she has just risen from the 
Mtlladhara. Woman marriageable, by the ripening influ¬ 
ence of the sun above anahata, she attains maturity. The 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


93 


woman after marriage (Pativrata lit. the selection of a 
husband) ; Pali, husband, K&mee'vara, who is in the 
Brahmarandhra. Whatever she does, in thesejjiree stages 
(of girlhood, etc.) Good things, the flowing of ambrosia, 
etc. ; Fire in the SvSdhish^hana : it helps because the 
lunar orb becomes liquified by that fire and thus causes 
the flow (of nectar). The Sanatkumaratantra supports the 
above assertion. “ The ascetics called Pris'nis devoted to 
S'rlvidya having assembled instruct one another ; arise, 0 
Bharatas, do not delay, desire the fire in the pericarp of the 
SvadhishthSna ; with the help of the Sun, having liquified 
(the moon’s disc in Sahasrara) be contented (by the flow of 
nectar caused by the union) of the king (S'iva) who is.with 
Vma . . . in the marriage of the female serpent (kundalini), 
fire alone was the companion.” 

Thus another S'ruti (Tai. Br., Ill, 12, 3) also says, 
“ May the pure feet which are blazing, illuminating, 
bright, glorious, and the means of entering the world (of 
Brahman) make us satisfied.” Blazing, illuminating, etc., 
indicate respectively, fire, sun, moon, and Kala. Gharana 
(feet) moving to and fro ; hence Kundalini which moves 
(between Mtliadhara and Sahasrara). The meaning is, let 
the Kundalini satisfy us by the flow of nectar entering the 
seats of fire, etc. This is further explained in the S'uka- 
samhitS : “ May KunrfalinI, whose movements are secret 
and who by the blaze of the fire, by the illumination of the 
sun, and by the brightness of the moon, causes the 
ambrosia to flow through the seventy-two thousand 
channels, make us contented.” Thus also explained we 
find the same in the Yasishtha and other Tantras. (40) 

112. Bhavanl. 

Bhava .means, Mahadeva, Samskra, and Manmatha ; 
and ana to give life. The Devi Pr. explains the meaning 
thus : “ Bhava means Rudra, Kama, the ocean of Samsara ; 
Devi is called Bhavanl because she gives life to the 
above.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Or, the -water form of Siva (one of his eight forms) is 
called Bhava, his wife is Usha, and his son S'nkra. We 
read the same in the Linga and Vayu Prs. The V&yn Pr. 
adds, “ Because all beings came from him and subsist in 
water, as he is the origin and supporter of all beings, he is 
called Bhava.” She is BhavanI because she is the giver of 
life (ana) to Bhava, water. 

Or, according to the Padma Pr. in the chapter enu¬ 
merating the hundred and eight places of pilgrimage, she 
is said to be the presiding deity of the place called 
Sthanes'vara. 

113. She is to be attained by meditation. (Bhavana- 
gamya.) 

Having described the five forms, he describes by a 
few names the means of reaching them. 

BhavanCh. There are two kinds-of meditation, one on 
the words themselves (S'abda) and the other on the mean¬ 
ings (Artha) ; words mean here sacred words which are 
to be meditated upon according to the will of the Guru. 
We have explained in the MImamsakavada kauttthala, 1 as 
depending on the will of the Lord. Meanings : tending 
towards action (PravrittirOpa). This is also explained in 
the above work as the relations of cause and effect. The 
word gamya may be taken as agamya unattainable. 

Or, She e is unattainable by the path of action (Karma- 
marga). Or, it means the purification of the mind as the 
result of that (right action). 

Or, there are three kinds of meditation. The Ktlrma 
Pr. says, “ There are three forms of meditation, Brahml, 
Mahes'varl, and Akshara, these three, 0 twice-born, 
always, reside in Rudra.” In another place it says, “ O 
Brahmana, learn the three kinds of meditation set forth 
by me ; one is concerning me (akshara) ; the second is 
upon the unmanifested (Mahes'vara) ; the last is on Brah¬ 
man with the three attributes (gunas) ; th us the three kinds 
1 The MSS. are available in the Southern Dts. *■ 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


95 


(of meditation) should be known.” This was told to 
Indradyumna by the lord in his tortoise incarnation. 
The characteristics of these (meditations) should be learned 
from the RatnatrayaparikshS of (Appaya) DlkshitaT 1 

Or, there are three states of meditation, named, Sakala, 
Sakala-Nishkala and Nishkala. The YoginJhridaya dis¬ 
tinguishes the three kinds of meditations thus (I, 27J: 
“Meditation (from MolSdhara) to Ajna is Sakala ; (from 
Indu) to Unmarii is Sakalanishkala ; in supreme abode 
(Mahabindu) is Nishkala." 

114, The woodcutter of the forest of earthly existence; 
(Bhavaranyakufharika.) 

• 115: Delighting in benevolence. (BhadrapriyS.) 

Or, Bradra may mean a kind of elephant. 

116. Of benevolent appearance. (Bhadramfirtih.) 

117. Conferring prosperity on the devotees. (Bhakta 
saubhSgya dayini.) 

According to the Agni Pr., “ Bhaga means fortune, 
desire, magnanimity, strength, effort, sun, and fame.” 
subhagA, Lalita herself. 

Saughabyas are her qualities -, she unites (the above 
mentioned ones) with herself. But in the Padma Pr. it is 
said, “ Sugarcane, Parijata (Taruraya), nishpa and vajlra 
seeds, cow’s milk with its changes (i.e., butter milk, curd, 
ghee, etc.), the saffron coloured things, flower, and salt, thus 
the eight things are called SaubhagyAshtaka." Because 
these are used on auspicious occasions. 

Or, Su much, BhAgya luck, i.e.. She makes her de¬ 
votees fortunate. 

From 109 to 117. Nine names are divided according to 
the Chchalakshara Sfttras. (41) 

118. Delighting in devotion. (Bhaktipriya.) 

Bhakti is of two kinds, primary (Mukhya) and second¬ 
ary (gauna); primary devotion is a particular mental 
modification called * longing ’ directed towards Is 1 vara. The 


' 'Hie author of 104 works on different subjects. 



96 


LA LIT A SAHASKANAMA 


Bhaktimlmamsa Stltra (S'andilya Sutra, I, 2) says, “ It 
(devotion) is supreme longing for the Lord.” Supreme 
(Para) indicates according to the commentator that there is 
another kind (secondary) of devotion. The secondary 
devotion is in the form of service (to Lord) as described in 
a Stltra (I, 20), “ The attainment of concentration is by 
gauui.” The Garuda Pr. says, “ The root Bhaj is repeated 
in the service ; so service is declared by tlie wise to be an 
important means (of reaching the Lord).” 

There are many kinds of devotion, such as, remember¬ 
ing, pronouncing the name of God, etc. The Aditya and 
Garutfa Prs. say, “ The devotion is of eight kinds, even if 
found in a barbarian (mlechcha) he is best of Brahmanas, 
he is a Sanyasin, he is prosperous, he is an ascetic and he 
is a learned man,” etc. 

The Vi. Bhag. Pr. says, “ There are nine kinds of 
devotion.” The Bra. Naradiya Pr. says, “Ten kinds of 
devotion should be known, they are like a conflagration to 
the forest of sin.” So there are many kinds of Bhakti like 
the above which should be known. All these are here 
included in the word Bhakti. The S'iva Pr. says, “ What 
can mortals do for me who is (ever) satisfied and who has 
accomplished his end ; but (the devotees) whatever they 
do (by devotion) externally or internally, I receive.” 

119. To be approached by devotion. (Bhaktigamya.) 

The S'ruti (Katha-Up., IV, 1) says, “The self-existent 
constrains the senses which turn to external objects ; there¬ 
fore man sees the external objects, not the internal self ; 
but the wise, with eye averted, and desirous of immortality, 
behold the inner self.” The Smriti also says, “The 
Yogins see the eternal Lord.” The Yoga Sutra (I, 23) 
says, “ By meditation also upon Is'vara.” The commentary, 
Rajamartanda, explains meditation as devotion. The 
Brahma Stltra (III, 2-24) says, “And in the state of perfect 
conciliation also (the Yogins apprehend the highest 
Brahman) according to S'ruti and Smriti.” The meaning 



LAUTA KAHASRANAMA 


97 


is although Brahman is unmanifest, it becomes perceptible 
through devotion ; thus S'rntis and Smritis say. Bh. Gita 
also (XI, 54), ‘‘ By undeviated devotion, I may-thus be 
perceived, Arjuna, and known and seen and entered in 
essence, '0 Parantapa.” Here entered means Salvation, the 
attainment of Brahman itself, that is to be attained by 
Devotion alone. 

To be approached. (Gamy a) also means to be obtained ; 
because in the S'ruti (Chcha. Up., II, 23-2): One who 
resides in the Brahman obtains immortality,” the word 
reside means devotion. Also the Bhakti and Brahma 
MlmamsSs (S’andilya, I, 4 and Vedanta, 1,1-4) say, “ Of him 
who is engaged in that (devotion) immortality is declared.” 
In the Nityatantra, also after describing the characteristics 
of devotion, explained as that which confers all objects of 
human desire ; it is said, “ One who places reliance on 
the Guru whose characteristics have been already 
described, and in his teachings, and in the practice 
taught by him, which destroys the doubts of his mind ; 
thus the devotion, which gives everything, is the cause of 
crossing (the ocean of) S'amsdra and making one firm. 
Devoid of which (devotion) men surely suffer here and 
hereafter.” 

Or, Bhakti , characteristics (Lakshana), Gamya, to be 
known ; because the words ‘ Satya,’ ‘ JnSna ’ (Tai. Up., II, 
1), etc., each with its own meaning cannot describe the 
unqualified Brahman (directly). Hence the Tris'ati (name 
73) says, “ She is to be known by characteristics.” In a 
certain Stltra of Jaimini, the word ‘ Bhakti ’ is explained 
as characteristics. In our Sivastava we said, “ 0 Lord, I 
have no power to praise even an atom of your greatness, 
yet resting on imperfect devotion to you I composed (this 
hymn). 1 The couch never cries ’ (a proverb) so in the 
world, 0 Paramatfiva (men succeed) by devotion, and not 
by their own power.” 

120. Controlled by devotion.. (Bhaktivasya.) 

13" 



TjALITA sahasranama 


It is said, “ O S'iva, though independent, thon art 
become subservient by devotion.” 

121. Remover of fear. (BhaySpaha.) 

The S’ruti (Tai. Up., II, 9-1) says, “ By knowing the 
bliss of Brahman none fears anything.” The VSyn Pr. 
also says, “ In the forest, and other places, in water, on 
earth, in the presence of a tiger, and before wild beasts, 
and robbers, and specially in all difficulties and diseases, 
the names of Devi should be repeated.” 

122. S'ambhavi. (The wife of S'iva.) 

Or, she is the mother of the devotees of Shmbhu. 
According to the Yoga S'astra (Hatha Pra., IV, 36) it means 
a Mudra which is there explained ; “ The object is within, 
the sight without closing or opening the eyes is outside, 
this is called S'ambhavi mudra, concealed in all the 
Tantras.” But the Kalpas'Otra (of ParasUrama, I, 32) 
says, ‘‘There are three initiations, Saktl, S&mbbavl, and 
Mantri,” and the characteristics of each are described in 
that (Shtra) in detail; according to the Devi. Bhag. Pr. 
“ A girl of eight years is called S’ambhavi.” 

123. Worshipped by S'arada. (Saradaradhya.) 

Sarnda, S'arasvatl, and the deities of speech. Or, 

she is to be worshipped in the spring, or in the 
rainy season {S'aradn). The, Mark. Pr. says, “ She should 
be worshipped in the spring and in the rainy season.” 
The Rudrayamala says, “ The Raktadandika (an aspect 
of Devi) should be worshipped during the nine days in 
spring.” 

Or, S'aradn, the clear minded men ; or according to the 
Medinikos'a it means, one of the states of life (as'rama) 
called S'alhm. 

Or, according to the Anekarthadhvanimanjari, “ A 
means Vasudeva and A Brahma,” she is to be worshipped 
by the great ( S’(lrad<i) Vishnu and Brahma. The Kalika Pr. 
explains the word S'aradn thus: “Once upon a time in 
spring, in the ninth day, you were awakened by the devas ; 



iiALlTA SAHASRANAMA 


99 


hence you are known, in the world as well as in the seat, 
by the name SHradCt." 

124. S'arvanl. 

She is the wife of S'iva, whose body is the Earth ~~The 
Linga and Vayu Prs. say, “S'iva is called S'arva in his 
earth form, his wife, S'ukes'I and his son Angaraka.” 

125. Conferring happiness. (S'armadayini.) 

The Devi Bhag. Pr. says, “ She bestows happiness on 
devotees, hence she is called the bestower of happiness.” 

126. Sankari. (The wife of S'ankara.) 

S'am, happiness and Kara doer. The Kaiika Pr. says, 
“ In the beginning of each cycle (lit. creation, preservation, 
and destruction), I always accompany the stainless S'ambku, 
in the form of a woman, being born of Daksha. Then the 
Devas will praise nde, the all-pervading illusion (Vishnu 
Maya), the Yoga-sleep, 1 the universe itself, by the name 
of S'ankari and Rudrani.” 

127. S'rlkarl. (Producing success.) 

According to the Vishnusahasranama, S-rlkara is 
Vishnu and his wife is S'rikari. 

11th : 46 names are divided. 

128. Chaste. (Sadhvi.) 

Because in the three times (past, present and future) she 
is attached, to none but to her own husband ; hence she 
has unequalled virtue. The Aeharya (Saundaryalahari 96) 
says, “ How many poets share the wife of Brahma ? 
Cannot every one by means of wealth, become the lord of 
Sri (the wife of Vishnu) ? But, 0 virtuous one, first among 
faithful women, your breasts are untouched save by Maha- 
deva, not even by the paste of Kuravaka.” 4 The Devi 
Bhag. Pr. says, “ Thou art praised as sadhvi (the virtuous 
one) an account of unequalled fidelity (to thy Lord).” 

1 A peculiar state iu which the Yogi realises supernatural consci¬ 
ousness. 

s The Kuravaka is a kind of pasto made of the leaves of the red 
amaranth and is used to redden the cheeks, breasts, palms, and 
soles of ludian females. 



loo 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


129. Having a face like the spring moon. (Steratchan* 
dranibhananii.) 

130. Slender waisted. (Sfttodari.) 

Or, satndara, having hundreds of caves, i.e., Himavat, 
whose daughter she is. 

131. Peaceful. (Santimati.) 

As she does not appear rough to the devotees. 

132. Without dependence. (Niradhara.) 

As she is the true support of the universe, she herself 
has no dependence. 

Or, it is the worship called Niradhara. The Sfita 
Samhita (.1, 5, 3) says, “ There are two kinds of worship¬ 
ping the supreme S'akti.” It then describes the two kinds, 
as external and internal, and again the external has two 
divisions one Yedic, and the other Tantric, with their 
characteristics ; it then goes on to say (SI. 11 to 19), “ The 
internal worship is also of two kinds, one with support 
(Sadhara), and the other without support, (Niradhara) and 
the latter is higheiy the Sadhara worship is by means of 
mental images, etc. ; the niradhara worship is by pure 
intellect 1 (.i.e., without form). In the Sadhara worship 
Devi should be joyfully worshipped in a figure made up of 
the sacred syllables, according to the instructions of the 
Guru. The worship described as niradhara, is the 
absorption of the understanding (manolaya) in that kind 
of meditation (Samvit). In reality, pure intellect means 
nothing else, but the supreme S'akti. Hence for the 
destruction of Samsara, one should worship the supreme 
S'akti, the very self, the witness, free from the glamour of 
the manifold universe. By one’s own direct experience of 
Mahes'varl as the Self, She should be worshipped with 
much reverence ; this is the worship which leads to 
salvation.” 

133. Stainless. (Niranjanft.) 

’ The words in the text are adhara and Samvit. So they may 
mean, muladhara, auahata chakras as the places of worship 





Lalita sAhaskanama 


ioi 


Next by certain names, the text sets forth, first, the 
determination of the nature of the pure intellect, which is 
the object of Niradhara worship (.No. 132), by assertion, 
by negation, by positive definition, and by elimination of 
attributes ; then the means of obtaining it, and the real 
nature of the results thereby produced. 

There are three kinds of ignorant souls (Pas'us), the 
Vijnanakevala, he who sees the self in the non-self and has 
therefore that impurity alone ; the pralayakala, he who has 
the impurity of Karma, which is imperceivable and which 
gives him (new) bodies ; and the Sakala, he who has the 
impurity of the Maya, which creates the idea of duality. 
In these three, the second has also the impurity of the first 
and the third that of the second. These are explained in 
our work Setubandha. 1 

She is called stainless, because she is free from the 
impurity of the Sakala. 

Anjana, black, i.e., attached to ignorance because ignor¬ 
ance has the quality of veiling (naturq^ owing to its quaiity 
of darkness. The Yogavasishtha says, “Existence and 
non-existence of (desired) objects produce joy and sorrow. 
0 Rama ; impure inclination is termed ‘ attachment ’ 
(sanga).” TheS'ruti (S've. Up., 6-19) says, “.Blameless and 
stainless.” That is, she is free from contact with ignor¬ 
ance ; because of the non-existence of ignorance, which is 
pure illusion. The illusion means, that which corresponds 
to negation in the three times. Or, ni, much ranjana, 
redness, or joy. (43) 

134. Without impurity. (Nirlepa.) 

She is called so because she is free from the impurity 
of the Pralayakala. Lepa, the impurity arising from action 

1 In the Setubandha, he says, Sakala is he who worships Devi 
from Muladhara to Ajna ; Pralayakala, who worships Devi from 
Ajna to Unman!; and Nishkala or Vijnanakevala worships Devi in 
the supreme abode, Mahabindu. For more details, the commentator 
refers the readers to Lalitii Sahasranama, i.e., this work, name ;So4. 
The MS. copy has no reference to the Setubandha. 





i02 


LALIl'A SAHASKANAMA 


(Karina). The Bh. Gita (IY, 14), says, “ Actions never 
polute me.” 

Or, by the knowledge of Devi the devotee becomes free 
from impurity. The SO. Sam. (IY, 25, 25) says, “ The 
best amongst the knowers of Brahman, is never stained by 
any action, as the lotus leaf is not stained by water. 
Such is the glory of him, who is the best of the knowers of 
Brahman.” Bh. Gita (V, 10) also says, “ He is not poluted 
by sin, as a lotus leaf is not poluted by water.” 

.135. Without spot. (Nirmala.) 

She is said to be so, because she is free from the 
impurity of the Vijnanakevala. 

Mala, Cinavamala, or any spot. Or, avidya is called 
spot, which causes continual impurity, darkness and 
confusion. 

136. Eternal. (Nitya.) 

Though impurities are not permanent, their ruler is 
not so, because she is irresistible in the three times. 

This means the rejection of the theory of those, who 
say all is ideal amt momentary (Kshanikavijnanavada). 
The S'ruti (Br. Up., IV, 5-14), “ 0, this Self is indes¬ 
tructible.” 

Or, (nityti), the deities of fornights, or of time, or 
the mantra called by this name. 

137. Without form. (Nirakara.) 

This rejects the theory of those who hold, that every¬ 
thing has form and it belongs to the Vijnanavada School 
(idealism) and is called Madhyamika. 

Akara, the form to which the qualities are attributed. 
The. Vishnu Bhag. Pr. says, “ That (Brahman) is neither 
Devas, nor Daityas, nor human, nor animal, nor woman, 
nor eunuch, nor man, nor insect, nor quality, nor action, 
nor existence, nor non-existence. May victory attend Him, 
the infinite who remains after all negation.” 

138. Without agitation. (Nirakula.) 

Though in contact with avidya, she is not agitated. 



LALITA SAHASRAtfAMA 


103 


Or, she is far from («?», those whose minds are agitated 
akula). Or, akula, void ; this destroys the theory of the 
Gambhlra School, which holds that all is void (nihilism). 

139. Without quality. (NirgunS.) 

The opinion of the Tarka School is rejected here. 
The S'ruti (Sve. Up., 6-11) says, “ The witness, the thinker, 
pure, and without qualities.” As the qualities are 
connected with the body (matter) they are absent from 
what belongs to spirit (chit). This is explained in the 
Matsya and Padma Prs. where Niirada says to Himavat: 
“As I have said, Devi is devoid of attributes, listen well, 
to the explanation of the meaning of this saying : attributes 
(Lakshana) are the marks of Devas, and qualities (guna) 
depend upon body ; this Devi is without- qualities and 
cannot be distinguished by attributes.” 

140. Without parts. (Nishkala.) 

This rejects the theory of those who say that Brahman 
has parts. The (Yed.) S'Otra (II-3-43) says, “ (the soul) is a 
part of the Lord, on account of the^eclarations of differ¬ 
ence . . .” The Bh. Gita (XY, 7), “In the world my 

partis Jlva.” These two, S'ruti and Smriti are not opposed 
to one another, because the parts are merely attributed. 

Or, Nishkala, contemplation on (Brahman) without 
qualities. Vijanabhairavabhaffitraka says, “ Meditation on 
(Brahman) is without parts, since he is w ithout dependence 
and with no fixed resting-place. It is not meditation upon 
form as attributing face, hands, etc.” 

141. Tranquillity. (Santa.) 

Tripura Up. (Sve. Up., 6, 19) says, “Without parts, 
without motion, tranquil.” 

Or, the syllable S'a is anta at the end of the Amrita- 
blja (mantra), i.r., Devi is the amritablja mantra itself. 

Or, Atflnta : Aka, quarters, anta, reaching to ; /.<*., 
all-pervading. By this teaching Digambara’s theory that- 
the Self is limited, is refuted. 

142. Without desire. (Nishkama.) 



104 


tAMTA sahasranama 


This refutes the theory of those who hold, Recording 
to the Upanishads that the Lord’s will is eternal and 
thought also. The Dev! Bhag. Pr. says, “When her wishes 
are all fulfilled nothing remains for her desire.” The 
S'ruti (Br. Up., 2-3-G) says, “ The Atman is (defined) by 
not this, not this ” ; (5-1-1) “That is filled, this is filled.” 
The other Srntis which treat of qualities (gu/ia) relate to 
upadhis (attributes). 

143. Indestructible. (Nirupapiava.) 

Or, nir much, npa, near, i.e., in the body, plam, 
flowing (of the nectar), i.e., by whom the abundant 
flowing of nectar in the body occurs (vide No. 111). Thus 
the Ar. Up. (Tai. Ar., I) says, “ Wet the whole (body" in 
the streams of ambrosia), and further wet (the seventy-two 
thousand channels).” Know me always as born from the 
universe, i.e., the individual soul is a part and parcel of 
the universal one. (44) 

144. Ever free. (NityamnktA.) 

Or, whose devotes are ever free ; or as she is eternally 
free, i.e.. Salvation personified. 

145. Unchanging. (Nirvikara.) 

Vikfiras, the twenty-three catagories of the Sankhyas, 
beginning with Mahat. The Sankhyatatva KanmudI 
(Karika, III), says, “ The Mtllaprakriti, (the root of all) 
is no production ; the seven principles, the Mahat, etc., 
are productions and productive ; sixteen are productions 
(but unproductive) ; the soul is neither a production nor 
productive.” 

146. Without extension. (Nishprapancha.) 

■The Vis'va says, ‘‘Prapaneha means accumulation, 
extension, expansion.” The S'ruti (Man. Up., 7) says, 
“ They think the fourth state (the state of ecstasy) is the 
negation of illusion, peace, bliss, and non-duality.” 

147. Bodiless. (Nirasraya.) 

This refutes the theory of the Charvahas who hold 
that the Brahman is inseparable from the body. As she 



LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 


105 


is that on which all depends, she herself depends on 
nothing. It is said, “ Where is the foundation of Her on 
whom the universe is founded.” 

148. Ever pure. (Nityas'uddha.) 

Because in the three times she is without blemish, 
she is called ever pure. The S’rnti says, “ She is free 
from contact, great and purity itself ” ; and it is said, in 
the Smriti also, “ The body is very impure, and the dweller 
in it is very pure ”. 

140. Ever wise. (Nit.vabuddha.) 

According to the S'ruti (Br. Up., IV, 3, 30), “ For know¬ 
ledge is inseparable from the knower.” As she is in the 
form of chit, itself she is ever wise. 

Or, S'uddha (No. 148) and Buddha may apply to the 
two individuals (Tlrthankaras) of Jaina, who have become 
immortal (nityas) by the grace of Devi. Because we see 
that one of the worships of Devi is by following the six 
systems of philosophies, in which the Jaina scriptures are 
included. The meaning is that DevHs the T&ra (a deity 
of the Jaina) who is worshipped by these two. 

150. Blameless. (Niravadya.) 

Avadya, blame, />., the modifications of Avidya. The 
S'ruti (Bve. Up., 6,19) says, “Blameless and spotless.” 

Or, avadya, is the name of a hell : by her grace the 
devotees escape that hell. The KOrma Pr. says, “ Hence 
if any one remembers Devi day and night he never goes 
to the hell called avadya , as he is cleansed from all sins.” 
The Linga Pr., says, “ There are twenty-eight crores of 
hells from Ghora to Maya; in these cursed hells the 
sinners are scorch^, who here failed to take refuge in the 
Lord of Devi, S'ankara, and Nilalohita.” 

151. Compact. (Nirantar'i.) 

The Amara (Bio. 408) says, “ antara means opening, 
period, clothing, disappearance, diffei^nce, behalf, a hole, 
self, absence, outside, opportunity, middle, and individual 
soul.” The S'ruti (Tai. Up., II, 7-1) says, “ He who makes 
14* 




106 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


but the smallest distinction in separateness, fear arises in' 
him.” By this is refuted the theory of those who hold 
that the Brahman is subject to three kinds of distinction, 
i.e., sajatiya, etc. (difference in the same species, difference 
between different species, and individual differences.) (45) 

152. Without cause. (Nishkarana.) 

Since she is the cause of everything she is without 
cause. The S'ruti (S've. Up., 6, 9) says, “ He is the cause, 
he is the lord of the rulers of causes ; none created him. 
none is his superior.” 

Or, Ni.s , much, Krirann , the first liquid, i.e. y in her is 
fullness of the first liquid and she is (ever) joyful by that 
means. It is said, “ Residing in the big lotus garden'(in 
Sahasriira) and sharing the joy (caused) by KSrana (the 
ambrosia).” 

153. Faultless. (Nishkalanka.) 

The S'ruti (Is'a. Up., 8) says, “Pure, untouched by 

154. Without Limitation. (NirupSdhih.) 

Upa, near, adhi, gives. The red flower which 
transfers its colour to the crystal near it, is the. upOdhi. 
Similarly, ignorance is the up&dhi which causes the 
appearance of plurality in consciousness (chit). 

Or, Nirupadhi, is the real cause (sat-hetu) to identify 
Devi with the special quality of “ without parts ”, 

Or, there are two UpSdhis one 4 whole ’ the other 
‘ fragmentary ’ ; and she is free from both. 

155. Without a superior. (Niris’varS.) 

Because she is the ruler of all, she herself has no 
superior. Or, there are two systems, MJmSmsa and 
Sankhya, the former is monism and the latter atheism, and 
she belongs to both. 

156. Without passion. (Nlrilga.) 

The text noy^proceeds to reject the theory that, the 
differences in the mind belong to the Self, and to teach 
that renunciation is the means of overcoming the six 



LAlil'A S All ASK AN AM A 


ib7 

impediments (/'.«., desire, wrath, covetousness, bewilder¬ 
ment, pride, and envy). 

Baga, desire, because she has obtained all her desires. 

Or, according to the SAndilya Sutra (I, 6) “ (Devotion) 
is longing (Baga) as it is opposed to hatred and as it is 
expressed (by the word) ‘Rasa’ (essence).” Devotion 
means passion (or longing for) ; she is free from it (as she 
herself is supreme and she has no object to long for). 

Or Nlm, water, and ago, mountain, both of them 
being her forms. 

157. Destroying desire. (Ragamathani.) 

By not endowing her devotees with passion. By 
BtXgar is meant here, “ Desire, aversion and ardent attach¬ 
ment to life ” as described in the Yoga Stitra (II, 3). 

158. Without pride. (Nirmada.) 

159. Destroying pride. (Madaniis'ini.) 

Or, vtadmia, excessive anxiety, and a<una., 
consuming. (46) 

160. Without care. (Nis'ohinta.) 

UhintO, means recollection generally, here it means 
recollection of painful topics. It is said, “ Anxiety should 
be known as (resembling) a funeral pile, the only 
difference is the additional n sound in chinta, but as the 
pile (chitrt) burns the corpse, so anxiety burns the living 
man ” ; or, according to the Vis’va, chinta means delusion 
also—-she is without delusion. 

161. Without egoism. (Nirahankara.) 

It is said, “ Ahanktra is of three kinds, Yaikilrika, 
Taijasa, and BhOtadi. (According to the Satva, Rajas and 
Tamas, respectively^ 

162. Without bewilderment. (Nirmohit.) 

Aloha, is confusion of thought, distraction of the mind. 

163. Destroying bewilderment. (MohapOs'inl.) 

By imparting the idea of unity (tt^jer devotees). The 
S'ruti (Is'a. Up., 7), “To him who perceives unity what 
bewilderment and what sorrow can there be ? ” 



108 l.Al.ITA SAHAMtANAMA 

164. Without self-interest. (NirmamS.) 

Self-interest necessarily implies separateness and as she 

is without separateness, she is said to he witlu.ut self- 
interest. 

165. The destroyer of self-interest. (Mamatahantri.) 

166. Without sin. (NishpSpa.) 

167. Destroying sin. (Papanas’ini.) 

By the repetition of (her) mantra, etc., she destroys the 
sins of devotees. “ The S'ruti (Chcha. Up., V, 24, 3) says, 
“Like the point of a reed in the fire, so all his sins are 
burned up.’ 1 The Vasishfha Hmr. says, “ The Brahmana 
who is devoted to learning and penance and who continually 
repeats (mantras), even if he is always committing sinful 
actions, he is not afflicted thereby. Bin never resides in 
those who repeat (mantras), or offer oblations, or meditate, 
or make pilgrimages, or who perform S'irovrata (the rite of 
carrying fire on the head).” 1 The Padma Pr. in its 
Pushkarakhanda says, “The mass of sins though as great 
as Mount Meru is instantly destroyed by approaching 
KatyAyani. He who is devoted to Durr/O,, is not stained 
even by committing heinous crimes, in the same manner 
as the lotus leaf which is not affected by water.” The De. 
Bhag. Pr. also speaks to the same effect. The Brahmanda 
Pr. says, “ The sinful actions of those who are devoid of 
varna and its'rama, and the wretched, by mere meditation 
on Devi, become virtuous.” (47) 

168. Without anger. (Nishkrodha.) 

Because she has no object of hatred. The Bh. Gita 
says (9-29), “ There is none hateful to me nor dear.” 

. 160. Destroyer of anger. (Krodhas'amanl.) 

Anger, is one of the six enemies (vide No. 156) ; so 
Apastamba says, “He who sacrifices, offers oblation, or 
worships while angry, is deprived of all (benefit therefrom) 
like water in a vessel of unbaked clay.” 

170. Without greed. (Nirlobha.) 

> S'irovrata, according to the Seta Samhita is the S'aiva initiation. 



LAM'l’A SAHASUANAMA 


ioo 


Because she is exceedingly liberal. 

171. Destroying greed. (Lobhaniis'ini.) 

It is said, “ Greed destroys all good qualities.” The 
Tantraraja on the characteristics of the guru Says, “ He is 
the guru who is without doubt, the remover of doubt and 
expects nothing.” After this the characteristics of these 
(latter) two qualities are explained. 

172. Without doubt. (Nissams'ayft.) 

173. Destroying doubt. (Sams'ayaghni.) 

The .<ruti (Mun. Up., II, 2, 8), “ All doubts are cut¬ 
away ” ; and the Smriti also echoes the same. 

12th verse divides 49 names. 

* 174. Without origin. (Nirbhavii.J 

The Bh. Gita (13-12) says, “The Supreme Brahman is 
without origin.” 

173. Destroying sainsiira. (Bhavanfts'ini.) 

The S'aktirahas'ya says, “ In the ninth day of the lunar 
month, according to the rule, as to him who anoints 
ChandikS with ghee, hear the result of that action : he is 
raised out. of the ocean of Sam Sara and shines in the 
Durgaloka, together with the preceding ten and also 
succeeding ten generations.” The Ktlrma, and De. Bhag. 
Prs. speak to the same effect. 

Or according to the BrihatjStola Up. (No. 26), 
Bhavanft+inl is the name of a river. (48) 

176. Without false imaginings. (Nirvikalpa.) 

Vikalpa, is a notion conveyed by (mere) words with¬ 
out corresponding objects. The Yoga Sfitra (I, 9) says, 
“ Vikalpa (fancy) is a notion conveyed by mere w'ords, but 
of which there is no-object corresponding to reality.” The 
Khandana khanda-khsdya (a work on Logic by Harsha) says, 
“The word gives knowledge of an object which cannot 
possibly exist.” The Gautama Stttra also in the examina¬ 
tion of the result (4-50) says, “ Thatjs not real which is 
created in the mind.” Hence she is in the form of 
unconditioned eternal knowledge. 



110 LALITA SAHASKANAMA 

Nirvikdlpn, in the last mental modification, ue. (last 
stage of meditation), there are no (nir) specific distinctions 
( Vihalpa). 

Or Vi, opposed ; kalpa, theory. There is no theory 
opposed to her existence because everything is inseparable 
from her, i.e., Devi is devoid of all separateness. The 
Ved'm. Stitra (III, 2,14) says, “ For Brahman is merely 
devoid of form on account of this being the main purport 
of Scripture.” By this it is established that the special 
characteristic of Brahman is that it has no such distinction 
as that of subject and object. 

177. Undisturbed. (Nirabadha.) 

When it is seen that the appearance of silver in the 
shell, is deceptive the illusion vanishes ; there is no such 
liability to error in her nature. 

178. Without difference. (Nirbheda.) 

As she is neither connected with Anuyogitva, (for) 
nor with Pratiyogitva (against) to the mutual non-existence, 
She is said to be without difference. The Kfirma Pr. says, 
“ Thou art the Supreme Shkti, infinite, supreme ruler, 
devoid of all differences and the destroyer of all difference.” 
In another place, “ Some ignorant persons say, there is a 
difference between S'akti and the possessor of it (S'iva), but 
those Yogins who meditate on reality recognise non¬ 
separateness.” 

179. Destroyer of difference. (Bhedanas'inl.) 

Bhed<t the dual knowledge ; she causes its destruction 

by the knowledge of reality. 

180. Imperishable. (Nirnaka.) 

• Nfim, end. The Sruti, (Tai. Up., Ill) “Brahman is 
being, knowledge, and infinity.” 

181. Destroying death. (Mrityu mathani.) 

The death of devotees. The Tripura Up. (No. 82) says, 
“ Why it is said, because from mortality he obtains 
immortality, attains imperishable state ; attains the eternal 
existence ; and he himself becomes Rudra.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


111 


182. Without action. (Nishkriya.) 

Because she is without action, whether ordained or 
prohibited. The S'ruti, (Chcha. Up., 8, 12, 1) “ Only one 
who has no body is unaffected by likes or dislikes.” 

Or, the expression may mean, one who has become the 
actor and the cause, etc., without the two means of action 
(material and instrumental causes). For the Vishnu Pr. 
says, “ Just as the fragrant object is enough by its very 
presence to distract the mind, so does the Supreme Lord 
without help (the creation of the Universe).” 

183. Receiving nothing. (Nishparigraha.) 

According to the Medinl, “ Parigralia means, attendants, 

wife, appropriation, root.” She is none of these. (49) 

184. Incomparable. (NistulA.) 

The Tripura. Up. (No. 82) says, “Without cause or 
comparison.” 

185. Blue haired. (Nilachikura.) 

186. Imperishable. (Nirapilya.) 

187. Without transgression. (Niratyaya.) 

The Vis'va says, “ At,gay a, means, transgression, 
punishment, obstruction, fault, and emaciation.” 

188. Difficult of attainment (Durlabha). 

Even to yogins. 

189. Difficult of approach. (Durgama.) 

Or, Adurgama, accessible ; or, durgama, is the name 
of a Daitya whom Devi caused to be slain. 

190. Durga. 

The Mark. Pr. and the Lakshmltantra in the 
PAncharAtra say, “ In that place I am going to kill a great 
Daitya named Durgama, hence my name shall be Durga.” 
This is the goddess who resides in the place called 
Sannati on the bank of the river, Bhlmarathl. The word 
Durga is explained in the Devi Pr. : “ Indra, and other 
Devas were delivered from mental and physical fear, in 
difficulty and in battle, hence (Devi) is called Durga (■/>., 
deliverer).” This Devi, solicited by king Subahu, who 



112 


LAUTA SAHARRANAMA 


begged a boon of her, established herself under this 
name at Benares. This story also occurs in the De. 
Blits. Pr. According to this a nine year old girl also is 
called Durgft. 

191. Destroyer of pain. (Dnkhahantrl.) 

DnJcha, pain, caused by Snmf.am. The Gautama 
Sutra (I, 22) says, “ Salvation is the complete release from 
that (pain).” The S'ruti also, “ He lives completely freed 
from pain.” 

192. Conferring happiness. (Sukhapradft.) 

SiMia, happiness, i.e., in this world, in the next world 

and beatitude. The S'ruti (Tai. Up., II, 7) says, “ Only- 
after obtaining the essence (Rasa, i.e., Brahman) does one 
become blissful.” Refer for further details to the Padma 
Pr. Pushkarakhanda last six chapters. (.50) 

193. Unattainable by Sinners. (DushfadUra.) 

The De. BMg. Pr. says, “ Those who argue sophisti¬ 
cate never worship Devi, the ruler of the Universe, the 
benevolent.” 

194. Putting an end to evil customs. (Dura- 
chilras'amani.) 

Evil customs are contrary to the Scriptures ; concerning 
this (more) will be said below as, “ She quickly destroys 
all the sins of men committed by neglecting the daily rites 
and observing the prohibited ones.” 

195. Devoid of faults. (Doshavarjita.) 

Doslm, passion, hatred, etc. 

196. Omniscient. (SarvajnO 

The S'ruti (Mund. Up., I, I, 9) says,- “ One who 
perceives all and knows all.” The Devi Pr. also, “ As she 
knows everything she is called Omniscient." 

197. Intense compassion. (Sandrakaruna.) 

198. Having neither equal, nor Superior. (SamAnil- 
dhikavarjitii.) 

The S'ruti (S've. Up., 6, 8), “ No one is seen equal or 
Superior to him,” (51) 



LAXITA SAHASRAK&MA 113 

199. Possessing all S'aktis. (Sarvas'aktimavl.) 

The text now sets forth her qualified form (Saguna). 

She is not to be separated from any of the S’aktis such 

as, Bala, Bagala, etc. Or, she is the aggregate of all the 
divine powers. In the Lakshml Tr. Pancharatra Devi says 
to Indra, “0 Indra, lam Mahalakshml, in the S'vayambhava 
Kalpa, I was born as the slayer of Mahisha (daitya) for 
the well-being of all Devas. Those portions of my powers 
which entered the bodies of the Devas together became 
my supremely beautiful form. My powers, 0 Indra, 
became manifest in the form of the weapons of the 
Devas. - ’ The Mark. Pr. explains the same in detail. 

Sarva may mean infinite, because the Linga Pr. says, 
“ The wise recognise whatever energies belong to objects, 
as Gauri." 

200. (The source of) all good fortune. (Sarvamangalii.) 

The Devi Pr. says, “She gives all the good fortune 

(longed for) in the heart, all desired good objects, hence 
she is called Sarvamangala. And she removes the pain 
of the devotees and gives to Hara all the best and choicest 
things, hence, Sarvamangala.'’ 

Thus ends the third Kalii, called Dhtlmrika, with 
the second hundred, in the Saubhilgyabhlskara, composed 
by S'rl Bhtsurananda. 


THE THIRD HUNDRED 

201. Leading into the right path. (Satgatiprada.) 

Satgati includes all stages from Svarga to Moksha ; 
or, sat, Brahman, gati , knowledge ; or, sat, of wise, gait, 
goal. For it is said by great men, “ Thou art the way, 
thou alone art the way, O BhavSnl.” 

The Padina Pr. says, “ 0 King, he who worships 
(Devi) at the three times on the fourteenth day, goes to 
the supreme abode where Devi is . . . Having 

15\ 



114 


LALITA SAHASIlAKAMA 


performed on a large or small scale, the rites according to 
his means, he shines in the world of Rudra.” Thns in 
four chapters, the above book treats of the rites and 
ceremonies of worship which lead to all the worlds. 

202. Ruler of all. (Sarves'varl.) 

Because she is the ruler of all, she leads into the right 
path. 

203. All. (Sarvamayl.) 

Without non-separation there cannot be unlimited 
dominion, hence this name. 

Sarvu includes all the Tatvas from Earth to S'iva. 

The Knmika says, “ There are two hundred aDd 
twenty-four worlds ; these should be meditated upon as if 
they were the hairs on the body of the Lord. Thi§ is the 
Bhuvana method. One who praises by means of the fifty 
letters, should meditate on them as on the skin of the 
Lord of Devas, the holder of the trident. This is the 
letter method. One should meditate on the blood of S'iva 
by means of the seven crores of mantras which arise from 
the root Vidyas (Vedas). This the mantra method. The 
words of the mantras which are various, according to 
different arrangements Stand for the flesh and the blood¬ 
vessels of the Lord. This is the word method. The 
thirty-six Tatvas, beginning with the earth are the forms 
(/.e., Suva's) sinews, bones and marrow. This process the 
compreliensers of the Vedas call the Tatva method.” 

204. She is the very essence of all mantras. (Sarva- 
mantra svarOpinl.) 

This and the next two following names together 
express the previous name. 

Mantras, viz., seven crores of mantras. The Sundarl 
TApanlya Up. says, “ Many mantras are arranged on 
either Side of the Vidya (the fifteen Syllabled mantra).” 
This is more clearly explained by Gaudap&da in seven 
Sutras (3 to 9) and the commentator of them also explains 
that sh® is the essence of all Mantras, (52) 



lAlIta sahaskanama 


115 

205. She is the soul of all Yantras. (Sarvayantratmika.) 

Yantras are ghata, argala, etc. 

206. She is the spirit of all Tantras. (Sarvatantra- 
rttpa.) 

Tantnm are the Vamakes'vara and others. Or, she 
is to be sought after by means of all the Tantras. It is 
said, “ Many paths, different according to the scriptures, and 
all leading to success, merge in thee alone as the rivers do 
into the ocean.” These (fitjamns) as her body, the 
Kamika says, “ (1) Kamika the lotus feet, (.2) Yogaja— 
ankles ; (3) and (4) Karana and Prasrita—the toes ; (5) 
Ajita—the knees ; (6) DIpta—the thighs ; (7) Ams'uman— 
back ; (8) Suprabheda—navel; (.9) Vijaya—stomach ; (10) 
Ntevasa—heart; (11) Svayambbuva—the bosom ; (12) 

Anala—the three eyes ; (13l Vlrugama—throat; (14) 

Rurutantra—ears ; (15) Makuta—crown ; (16) Vipula— 
arms ; (17) Chandrajnana—chest; (18) Bimba—lotus face ; 
(19) Prodglta—tongue ; (20) Lalita—cheeks ; (21) Siddlia— 
forehead; (22) Santtlna—earrings ; (23) Kirana—red colour¬ 
ed gems; (24) Vatula—garments; all other auxiliary and 
supplementary Tantras—the hair on the body. Thus the 
body of the Great Queen should be contemplated on under 
the form of the Tantras.” 1 

207. Manonmanl. 

“ Manonmanl is the eighth place from the centre 
between the eyebrows, just below the Brahmarandhra ; 
being of that form, she is so called.” 2 The Svachchanda- 
sangraha says, “ There is a Shkti the cause (of all causes), 
above that comes Unmanl. In that centre there is no 


1 Four numbers are left here as there are twenty-eight S'aiva 
itgamas ; viz., (1) Sarvokta, (2) ParamesVara, (3) Chintya, (4) Suk- 
snma ; and for Sahasra, Prasati is substituted. 


2 Yoginihridaya, I, 26, says, from the Bhrumadhya there are eight 
places, viz., (1) Indu, (2) Rodhinl, (3) Rada, (4) Radanta, (5) S'akti, 
(6) Yyapinl, (7) Samana, (8) Unmanl, (or Manonmanl), and each 
succeeding one is more subtle than those preceding it. The ninth is 
called Mah&bindu. * 





116 


l.At.ITA SABASRANAMA 


time or space, no Tatva, no deity? complete freedom, 
purity, supremacy ; what is called Rudravaktra (mouth of 
RudraJ. This is called the S'akti of .Siva ; in it there 
is neither subject nor object, spotless.” So in the 
S'ruti (Rndrihlhyfiya), “ Salutation to Vitmadeva, supreme 
excellence,” (it is explained), that the S'akti of Siva is 
named Manonmani. The Tripura Up. also mentions, “ That 
when the mind, free from attachment to object, fixed on 
the heart, attains the state of Unntnnl , then the supreme 
abode (one reaches).” Again Manoui/umt is a kind of 
MudriX ; according to the yogaS'astra, its characteristics are 
described thus: “By this process the eyes neither close 
nor open, by which breath is neither inhaled nor exhaled 
and the mind is a blank neither speculating nor doubting, 
direct that Manonmani towards me.” The Br. Naradiya 
Pr. says, “ When the process of meditation, meditator and 
the object of meditation are entirely destroyed, then 
Unman! stage arises; consequently he enjoys the ambrosia 
of wisdom.” 

Or, the minds (of the devotees) are raised to 
(Unmanyante) the higher knowledge (Unma a lifting up). 

208. Mahes'varl (the wife of Mahes'vara). 

The S'ruti (Mahanarayana Up., II, 8), referring to 
Mahes'vara says, “ It is the Svara (Omkara) which is 
proclaimed in the beginning of the Vedas and also esta¬ 
blished at the end and which is involved in its own nature 
(on syllables) indicates him who is supreme Makemara.” 
Here the S'ruti declares, “ Mahes'vara as transcending the 
three gunas. The Linga Pr. says, “In his dark quality 
(Tamas) he is called Rudra, the destroyer ; in his passionate 
quality (Rajas) the one born from the golden egg (Brahma) ; 
in his pure quality (Satva) he is the all-pervading Vishnu ; 
devoid of the three qualities (Nirgiwa) he is Mahes'vara. 
He is Mahes'vara whose emblem (the Linga) is worshipped 
by persons possessing purity of mind and practising 
celeba£J\” The Bharata also says, “ He is the lord of all 



LALiTA SAHAgRANAMA 


117 

creation and the lord of (lmman'l greatness.” The 
Vatulas'udha (Agama) speaks of Make (vara as the aggregate 
of twenty-five Tatvas. 

209. Mahadevi. (The great Devi.) 

Great, whose body is immeasurable. The Devi 
Pr. says, “ Her body is immense and cannot be computed 
by any measurements, the root Malta, means worship; 
hence she is termed Mahadevi.” 

Or, S'iva in his eighth form, vis., that of the moon is 
known as Mahadeva ; his wife is Rohini, his son is mercury 
(Budha). The Linga and Vayu Prs. corroborate the 
same. 

* According to the Psdma Pr. Mahadevi is the presiding 
deity at the Chakratirtha on the Ganrfaki river. 

210. MahiUakshmi. 

She is the presiding deity at the Karavlra (Kolhapur) 
according to the (Padma Pr.). 

Or, Malta, great, Lakshin!, the wife of Vishnu. 

According to the Mailara Tr. ” Mahdla is the name 
of a daitya whom she destroyed (si/a, and ksltapa to kill), 
hence she is called Mahalasa and Mahalakshmi, residing 
on the shore of the western sea at the foot of the Sahya 
Mountain.” The S'iva Pr. concerning S'iva says, “The 
beautiful, azure (S'yama), all-fascinating, Supreme S'akti 
seated on the lap of S'iva is called Mahalakshmi.” The 
Avushyasfikia says, “ S'rl Lahslnul ...” Lakshmi is 
called Parvati. The Mark. Pr. also says, “ Mahalakshmi 
is the origin of everything manifested as the three gunas.” 
Again according to Dhaumya (Smriti) a girl of thirteen 
years of age is called Mahalakshmi. 

211. Beloved of Mrida. (Mrirfapriya.) 

Mrida, happiness ; S'iva in his Satvic qualities called 
Mrida. The Mahimuastava says, “ I bow down to Mrida, 
who predominates in Satvic nature, for the sake of confer- 
ing happiness on men.” (53) 

212. Great shape. (Maharttpa.) 




r.ALiTA sahahkaNamA 




(rival, supreme form, supreme over the other four 
forms. The Vishnu l*r. (I—II) says, “ Purusha, O twice 
born, is the first form of the supreme Brahman, then the 
manifested (five gross elements) and unmanifested 
(Pradhlna) and lastly time. The enlightened see the 
supreme abode of Vishnu which transcends these (four) 
Pradhlna, Purusha, Vyakta, and time. These four forms, 
Pradh'ma, etc., in their due proportions are the causes of 
the production of the phenomena of creation, preservation 
and destruction.” 

213. Mighty object of worship. (Mahapfijya.j 

That is, worshipped even by Suva and others. The 
PAdma and De. BhAg. Prs. say, (1) Suva, (2) Brahma, (3) 
Vishnu, (4) Kubera, (5) Vis'vedevas, (6) Vayu, (7) Vasu, (8) 
Varuna, (9) Agni, (10) S'akra, (11) Sflrya, (12) Soma, 
(13) Graha (planets), (14) the Rlkshasas, (15) Pisrachas, 
(16) Matriga/ias, etc., worship respectively by means 
of U-) Mantra, (2) stone, (3) blue stone, (4) gold, (5) 
silver, (6) copper, (7) brass, (8) crystal, (9) gems, (10) 
pearls, (11) coral, (12) lapis, (13) lazuli, (14) tin, (15) 
adamant, and (16) iron, etc. (According to some) 
Agni, S'ukra, and Sflrya worship only idols made of 
gems. 

214. Destroying great sins. (MahApatakanas'ini.) 

The Brahmauda Pr. says, “ The highest expiation of 

all sin whether committed knowingly or unknowingly is 
brought about by the remembrance of the feet of the 
supreme S'akti.” The Brahmottara Khanda also says, 
“ Briefly, I will tell you in half a verse that the worship of 
S'iva, destroys the crime of even a hundred murders (lit. of 
Brahmins) according to the Artharatnavali, great sins, the 
killing of heroes. In the Sanbhagyaratnakara and other 
works, in the chapter on expiation the rules for repeating 
the Panchadaslmantra according to the nature of the crime 
are explained. 

215. The great illusion. (MahamSya.) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


119 


Because she causes confusion to Brahma, etc. The 
Mark. Pr. says, “ That divine Devi, Mahamaya, forcibly 
draws away the minds of even the sages and leads (them) 
into confusion.” The Kalika Pr. also says, 11 She who 
always makes him devoid of knowledge, the being who 
possessed knowledge (of his real nature) whilst in the 
womb, compelled him to take birth by means of the winds 
of delivery and leads him by reason of the Samskara of 
previous births to desire of food, etc., thence into confusion 
egotism, doubt, subsequently compelling him again and 
again to undergo (the stages of) anger, distress, and greedi¬ 
ness and then leads him into (sensual) desire and causing 
anxiety day and night, producing sometimes pleasure and 
sometimes pain, is called the Mahamayil (great illusion) ; 
hence She is the ruler of the Universe ”. 

Or according to one lexicon Maya means pride and 
compassion ; then MahlmSyS means frill of compassion. 

216. The great reality. (Mahasatva.) 

Satva, existence, strength, quality and being. The 
Vis'va says, “Satva means, quality of friends, etc., 
strength, things and reality.” 

217. The great energy. (Mahasaktih.) 

Because she is the energy of the whole universe. The 
Yadavasays, “ S’akti, power, strength, strife, weapon.” The 
Vishnu Pr. says, “ Just as the brightness of a fire is Spread 
abroad, so the energy of the supreme Brahman (spreads 
throughout) the whole world ; just as the brightness is 
greater or less according to the distance (of the fire) so it is 
with this energy, 0 Maitreya.” 

218. The great delight. (Maharalihj. 

Because sages find more delight in her than in worldly 
things. Or Mahtlmf/i, the wife of Mahakama. (54) 

219. The great extension. (Mahabhoga.) 

Extension, i.e., of the earth, etc. Or, Bhoga joy, 

wealth, etc. 

220. The great ruler, (Mahesfvarya.) 



120 


LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 


221. The great strength. (Mahavlrya.) 

Strength: according to the Vis'va, “ vlryn means 
semen, might, glory, and strength.” 

222. The great might. (Mahabala.) 

The Vis'va says, “Bala, small, taste, colour, soul, 
corpulence, army, Balariima, one of the daityas, Mahabali, 
and a crow.” If Bala means a crow, Bhusunda, etc., 
(crows) became great by the grace of Devi ; there is in the 
YogavasislVha an address from Bhusuntfa. “ We are twenty- 
one crows, brothers, sons of Chanda ; by us, together with 
our sisters, the great Devi was worshipped for a long time ; 
after finishing her contemplation Devi herself wishing to 
bless us favoured us ; thus we were liberated.” 

13th verse divides 40 names. 

223. The great intelligence. (MahabuddKih.) 

When the intelligence is directed towards her nothing 
remains to be known. The S'ruti (Clicha. Up., 6-1) says, 
“ Which, when known, the whole universe is known.” Or, 
from whom one obtains the highest (Mahat) intelligence. 

224. The great attainment. (Mahlsiddhih.) 

This is to be explained in two ways, as in the preced¬ 
ing instance. The Siddhix are the well-known super-human 
powers, vis., animh, etc. Other Siddhis are also explained 
in the Sktoda Pr. : “The first Siddhi is the manifestation 
of taste (when no object is tasted) ; the second is the over¬ 
coming of the pairs of opposites ; the third is the being 
both superior and inferior (i.e., he perceives no difference 
of degree) ; the fourth is the indifference towards the 
conditions of pleasure, pain, and life ; the fifth called 
without sorrow ( Vi*nka) is illuminator of body ; the sixth 
is steadfastness in penance and contemplation of the 
Supreme Self ; the sevehth is the power of unrestrained 
motion (through space) ; and the eighth is the power of 
suspension {i.e., uniform equilibrium). 

225. The ruler of the groat rulers. (Mahayoges'vares'- 

varl.) (55) 




LAtlTA SAHA SR AN AM A 


121 


226. The great Tantra. (Mahatantra.) 

Great because they confer many results. The Tantras 
are Kularnava, Jnanarnava and others. 

227. The great Mantra. (Mahamantra.) 

The Mantras are Bala, Bagala and others. 

228. The great Yantra. (Mahayantra.) 

The Yantras (magical figures) are Pftjachakra, Padma- 
chakra, Amritaghafo, Merulinga, etc. 

Or, Tantra (No. 226), the Svatantra Tr. Mantra (No. 
227) S'rlvidya ; and Yantra S'iddhavajra ; these {Tantra, 
etc.) are the best ( Mahat ) belonging to Devi. The 
Svatantra Tr. is so called because it is dependent on no 
oth*er. It is said in that, “ 0 great one, all Tantras former¬ 
ly described by you, only create mental confusion since 
they depend on one another ; therefore, 0 Lord, relate 
(to me) my independent Tantra.” Thus asked, “Listen, 
I will tell you the Kadimata ( Svatantra ) Tantra, which 
is complete and depends upon no other, to be concealed 
with all care ; the concealment is enjoined in the Tantras.” 
The Sau. La. (of AchSrya) also says (S'lo. 31): “The 
Lord of beings stood after promulgating sixty four Tantras, 
each of which confer some Siddhi ; then again by your 
intentness your Tantra which is independently capable of 
conferring all objects of desire, was brought to this world.” 

Concerning mantra (227) : “ S'rividyil is the best of 
mantras, etc.,” and supported by a thousand other sayings 
which can be found in the Kularnava and the S'aktirahasya. 
The NityS Tr. says regarding the Yantra, Siddhavajra. 
“ He who regards as equal to the other (F idyas) with the 
Vidya of Lalita, also this mantra with other mantras, and 
this yantra with other yantras—that man is only bewil¬ 
dered in mind.” 

229. The great seat. (Mahftsana). 

The seat, the thirty-six taivas beginning with the earth 
which are her seat. The De. Bhag. Pr. says, “ The. divine 
one remains dwelling in all Tatvag.” 



122 


LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


230. Worshipped by the method of MahaySga. (MataS 
y3ga kramSradhya.) 

Mahayaga is the worship of sixty-four yoginls from 
Akshobhya, who are the part (am-sa) of Brahmi, etc. ; 
other rites give some results (.this gives a quicker result). 
The S'As'vata (a lexicon) says, “ Krarna, energy, arrange¬ 
ment, moving and shaking.” 

Or, Mahayaga, explained in the Bhavanopanishad 
(No. 84) is most secret and is to be accomplished by 
S'ivayogins alone. This method is given in detail in the 
commentary and in the Prayogavidhi compiled by us. 

231. Worshipped by Mahabhairava. (Mahabhaira- 
vaptijitn.) 

Bhairava is Paramas'iva, the accomplisher of creation, 
preservation and destruction (of the universe). Each letter 
in the word Bhairava has a meaning ; Bha, creation 
(Bharana ) Ra, preservation ( Ramana ) and va, destruction 
(vamana ) lit. to vomit. The Padma Pr. says, “ S'ambhu, 
the origin of the Universe, worships the beneficent Devi 
who is the S'akti of the Mantras, holding the rosary in his 
hand, by means of Nyasa.” The Lalitopakhyana says, 
“The Lord Mahas'ambhu, by a great sacrifice caused 
Lalita to become manifest from the alter of the fire of 
consciousness.” (56] 

232. The witness to the great dance of Mahes'vara in 
the great cycle. (Mahes'varamahakalpa maha tandava 
sakshini.) 

Mahakalpa, the great dissolution (Pralaya); Great 
dance is caused by the fact that the Self alone remaining 
and having become bliss after the universe has been drawn 
into it; as, at that time, there is no other beside herself, 
she is the witness. The Panchadas'Istava says, “Your 
form alone is excellent, having the noose, elephant hook, 
bow of sugarcane, and the arrow of flowers ( vide names 
8-11 for the meaning of these), and witnessing the dance 
of the axe-bearing Parabhairava (Siva in his aspect of 



LAI.ITA SAHASRANAMA 125 

destruction) started at the time of his drawing the universe 
(into himself).” The De. Bhag. Pr. also says, “ This (Devi) 
at the dissolution (of the Universe), having drawn the 
universe into herself, sports, having absorbed the souls 
(linga) of all beings in her own body.” The Vasishfha 
Book VI, 2nd part, 81 chap, by more than hundred verses 
after describing the wonderful and terrible dance of these 
two (S'iva and Devi) concludes : “ Having a garland on 
his breast, having the wings of an eagle as his head-orna¬ 
ment, filled with red liquor, holding in his hand the great 
horn of the buffalo of Yama (Death), dancing to the sounds 
of his music, such as, Dhimba, Dimba, Sudimba, Pacha, 
Pacha, Jhamya, Jliamya, Prajhamya, may Bhairava with 
his (spouse) called Kalaratrl, who delights in dissolution, 
worshipped, protect you.” 

233. The wife of MahukamesVara. (Mahakames'a- 
mahishl.) 

234. The great Tripurasundari. (Mahatripurasiindarl.) 

Tripura, city of the three, i.e., the measurer, the measur¬ 
ing, and the thing measured. (57) 

235. To be adored by sixty-four ceremonies. (Chatush* 
shashfyupachftrfuihya.) 

These are enumerated by the holy Parus'urfuna in his 
Kalpasdtras (IV, 5). In other Tantras eight more (ceremo¬ 
nies) are given. “ Wearing the flowers (after dedication), 
(2) making religious endowments, (3) and (4) worshipping 
the guru and the devotees, (5) worshipping the S'aiva books, 
(6) sacrificing in the fire of S'iva, (7) receiving water which 
has washed the feet of S'iva, and (8) performing the fall 
ceremony called PrSnagnihotra.” All these seventy-two 
are explained in our work (Vari. Rahasya) in the Pfija 
chapter. 

236. Sixty-four sciences. (Chatushshashfikalilmayl.) 

These are differently enumerated in the S'arngadharlya, 

S'rldhara’s-Katha Kos'a and in the Lakshmlplthika and these 
are set forth by us : “ (1) The knowledge of the eighteen 



124 LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 

lettei s (Lipi), (2) and (3) the power of writing and reading 
these quickly, (4) knowledge of different languages, (5) 
composing verses in them, (6) gambling, (7) to (14) the four 
Vedas and the four auxiliary Vedas, (15) to (26) the twice 
six auxiliary sciences, (27) Tantra, (28) Purina, (29) Smriti, 
(30) poetry, (31) rhetoric, (32) drama, (33) to (38) the six, 
pacifying, controlling, attracting, enmity, ruining by 
magical practices, and killing, (39) to (45) the art of opposing 
the effects of motion, water, sight, fire, weapons, speech, 
and semen, (46) to (49) training elephants, horses, chariots, 
and men, (50) to (53) the knowledge of divination by bodily 
marks (Silmudrika), gymnastics, cooking, and power over 
snakes (Garudavidya), (54) Sushira, (55) Anadha, (56) 
Ghana, (57) creating illusion (Indrajftla), (58) dancing, (59) 
singing, (60) alchemy, (61) knowledge of gems, (62) thiev¬ 
ing, (63) knowledge of the pulse, and (64) disappearance, 
thus laid down by the poet Bhaskara the sixty-four sciences 
after examining (them).” 1 

Or, Kata, works, the sixty-four of them are enumerated 
in the Vamakes'vara Tr. 

237. Attended by the great sixty-four crores of bands 
of yoginis. (Mah-'ichatnshshashtikoti yogini gana sevita). 

The Brithmi and other seven divinities, eftch has eight 
S'aktis, Akshobhya, etc., who are the parts of them ; hence 
there are sixty-four. Each has a crore of bands. Really 
Speaking these sixty-four crores mean according to the 
Tantraraja different S'aktis ; “ In Lalita’s nine chakras, O 
beloved one, there are many S'aktis, numbering to 64 
crores.” (58) 

.The Great means nine times multiplied. Amongst the 
nine chakras, from Trailokya Moliana, in each chakra 
separately there are 64 crores of yogins dwelling. The total 
number comes to 5 abja, 7 arbuda and 6 crores of S'aktis. 

238. Manuvidya. 


1 The MS. ha-, a different enumeration of the P4 Kalas. 



lIlITA SAHASRANAMA 


j 25 

The S'rlvidya is of twelve kinds differentiated according 
to the twelve devotees, “ Manu, Chandra, Kubera, Lopa- 
mudra, Manmatha, Agastya, Agni, Sttrya, Indra, Skanda, 
S>iva and KrodhabhaWSraka (Durvasa). These are the 
devotees of Devi.” The description of each of these 
(mantras) is given in the JnilnSrnava. 

239. Chandravidya. 

240. Residing in the centre of the moon’s disc. 
(Chandramancfala madhyaga). 

Because Kundalinl breaks through the moon in the 
pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus. 

Or, in the evening prayer, the ceremony to obtain 
long* life, etc., Devi should be contemplated in the moon’s 
disc. In the Sdva Pr. Siva says to Devi, “ I am residing in 
the head of fire, you are residing in the head of the moon ; 
thus the world consisting of fire and moon is upheld by 
us.” The secret meaning is the moon’s disc is the 
Srichakra itself. 

241. Exquisite beauty. (Cbiirurfipa.) 

242. With beautiful smile. (ChAruhasa.) 

‘‘.The moon is thy sweet smile.” This saying means 
there is a certain stage of consciousness (Prabodha) which 
gives the highest bliss, and which should be known from 
a Guru alone; thus a (commentator) explains (this 
name). 

243. Wearing a beautiful crescent moon. (ChAru- 
chandra Kaladhara.) 

Char a, neither waxing nor waning, Chandrakalft., is the 
everlasting Kala (Sadakhya), in the form of consciousness. 

Or, Ohnndrakala is the daughter of a king. To her in a 
dream Devi appeared and told her to marry a prince by 
name Sudarsana who was worshipping Devi (KAmarAjablja). 
According to that story the meaning is. Chant, rightly, 
dluira supports. (Vida De. Bhag Pr., Book III.) (59) 

244. Ruler of animate and inanimate worlds. 
(CharAchara jagannAthA.) 



126 LA LIT A SAHASKANAMA 

245. Abiding in the Sriehakra. (Ghakrarftja 
niketanA.) 

The nine chakras beginning with Trailobyainohanaare 
the only dwelling place of Dev!. 

246. Parvati. 

The daughter of Mount Himavat. 

247. Lotus eyed. fPadmanayanS.) 

248. Shining like the ruby. (Padmaraga sama- 
prabba.) 

Or, Padma, lotus, r&ga, red, and prabita, co'our. For 
Kalyanacliarana says, “Protect, 0 Kundalini, whose colour 
is like the paste of saffron.” Hence this name refers to 
Amrita KundalinI also. (60) 

249. Seated on the seat (formed) of five corpses. 
(Pancha pretasanA sina.) 

The five Brahma, etc., when deprived of their 
respective S'aktis such as Varna, etc., are incapable of 
action; hence deprived of their power, they become 
corpses. Seated, couch formed by these five. The Jna- 
narnava says, “ 0 Great Is’Ana, tell me of the five corpses 
and their cause, how are they imperishable and eternal and 
yet lifeless ? ” Thus questioned by Devi, the Lord said, 
“ You have fitly questioned me, O Beneficent one, as to the 
seat formed of five corpses. Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, 
Is'vara and SadAsfiva, these, 0 noble one, are the five 
corpses, they are always motionless. The activity of 
Brahma manifested as creation should be known as VairiCt 
SaMi (devoid of it), Brahma is certainly a corpse. S'iva 
(in himself) has no activity. Wherefore activity belongs 
to. S'akti . . . Pure SadAs'iva becomes a motionless 

corpse, 0 Dear one, without S'akti, O Devi, he is incapable 
of doing anything.” 

250. The five Brahmans are her form. (Panchabrah- 
masvarttpini.) 

The five begin with Brahma and end with Sada- 
siva. These are included under Brahman ; because the 



LALITA S AH ASEAN All A 


127 


TripurasUdhftnta says, “ The unconditioned Brahman by 
the play of the Mtyt in itself (becomes), Brahma, Vishnu, 
Rudra, Isvara, and SadSs'iva. Thus by name only Brahman 
is in five forms.” 

Or, the live Brahmas are Is'ana, Tatpurusha, Aghora, 
Vamadeva and Sadyojlta. The Linga Pr. says, “ Jiva, Pra- 
kriti, Buddhi, Ahankara, and manas ; the senses, viz ., ear, 
skin, eyes, tongue, and nose ; and the subtle elements are 
the forms of the five Brahman.” It is described in the 
same book that the above (five subtle elements) are the causes 
creating the five gross elements. These are her forms. 

The SO. Sam. (IV, 14, 2) says, “ The one Siva, 
characterised by existence, knowledge, etc., without change, 
pure, becomes five by his own S'akti.” Becomes five, i.e., by 
the S'aktis of creation, preservation, etc., he becomes 
Sadyojata, etc. The Garuda Pr. also says, “ Vishnu who 
confers blessings on the world and destroys all the wicked, 
although one, becomes five, viz ., Vasudeva, Sankarshana, 
Pradyumna, Anirudha, and Ntrayana.” Ach'.rya also 
says, “ When you sport as a man (you become) the five 
persons; your casual talk (becomes) the three Vedas ; 0 
mother, a glance of your eyes, (becomes) the sun ; and 
your sweet smile, the moon.” 

251. Consciousness itself. (Chinmayl.) 

252. Supreme bliss. (Paramauandt.) 

The Sruti (Chclia. Up., VII, 23), “ What is infinite, 
that is happiness.” 

253. Consisting of permanent intelligence. (Vijna- 
naghana rflpinl.) 

Vijnana here means Chaitanya, ghana one essence, 
i.e., one essence of consciousness. Thus in the Sruti (Bri. 
Up., II, 4, 12), the word vijnlnaghana is explained. Or, 
vijn&na, jlva, because in the Sruti (Bri. Up. Ill, 4, 2) 
‘‘Remaining in vijnana ” is explained as jtv.'t. Ghana, 
mass, i.e., aggregate of jlvas. Hiranyagarbha is the 
synthesis of the aggregate of the Jlvas. Where in the Sruti 



128 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


(Prs. Up., 5, 5), the word “ Jlvaghana occopb, it is 
explained thus. (61) 

254. She is meditation, meditator, and the Object of 
meditation. (Dhyanadhyatridhyeyarfipa.) 

The root Dhyai to think, also called measurement 
(mana) as explained in the Yoga Sfltra (III, 2), “ Contem¬ 
plation is unison there of the understanding,” i.e. , she is 
the triad, of knowledge, of the knower and of the object 
of knowledge. 

255. Devoid of virtue and vice. (Dharmadharma 
vivarjita). 

Virtue and vice. Actions leading to desirable and 
undesirable results. It is said in the Matsya Pr., M Dharma 
comes from the root Dhftrana (Dhri) and ma, in greatness, 
so, as it bears and as it is a great one, it is called Dharm 
Thus the word Dharma is explained, “ That which leads 
to a desirable result, and taught by teachers as Dharma, 
and Adharma is the opposite of this.” The Samvarta 
Smriti says, “ That conduct which prevails in each country 
in accordance with tradition and not contrary to the 
Scriptures, is called Dharma." Yajnavalka (I . . .) also 
says, “ (Among the following actions) sacrifice, good 
conduct, self-control, non-injury, gift, and sacred study, the 
supreme dharma is that in which one perceives the Self by 
Yoga.” Jaimini also (Sfttra, I, I, 2) ” Dharma. is a purpose 
as characterised by the scriptural injunctions.” Adharma 
is to be understood as the opposite. Devi is free from 
these two because the Scriptures are meant only for the 
ignorant and the Devas are not subject to them 
according to the rules applicable to the ‘ animal creation,’ 
(Tiryagadh ikarananyiiya.) 

Or Dharma, bondage, and adharma, liberation, 
because these words are explained thus in a verse of the 
NityS Tr. ; She is free from these. The Tripura Up. says, 
” No end, no origin," no bondage, no aspirant, no desire of 
liberation, no liberation, that is the truth.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


129 


Or, DJuii'ma, the thing which possesses quality ; anU'’ 
adharma is the quality itself ; She neither possesses the 
quality nor is She the quality itself, i.e.. She is absolutely 
inseparable from the universe. 

Or, Dharma indicates the letter of S'a'kt.i, and adharma 
that of Suva; Vivarjitn, great increase. The meaning 
is that Devi is the tendril of Panchadasrt (vidya). 
The two letters (of Sakti and Suva) are explained 
in the Nityahridaya and should be learned from the 
teacher and we have explained them in our Varivasya- 
rahasya. 

256. Omnipresent. (Vis'vartlpa.) 

By nineteen names indicating the difference between 
Jlva and is'vara, the text proceeds to praise Devi under 
both forms. 

In the order of creation, the first manifestation is 
darkness (Tamas), the next is that of mahat, then that of 
the threefold egotism (ahankara), next the five subtle 
elements beginning with sound : among these are the five 
energies of knowledge (jnana S'akti) and the five energies 
of action (Kriya) ; in these energies the former five 
individually generate the five ■ senses (jnanendriyas) and 
collectively the Antahkarana. The latter five generate 
individually the five organs of action and collectively the 
Pranas. The sound and the others—four subtle forces 
generate the five gross elements. This is an established 
doctrine. There the Chaitanya manifested through the 
gross, subtle, and casual vehicles respectively termed, 
Vii'va, Taijnsa, and PrCtjna ; these manifested ones (three 
groups of vehicles) respectively are termed Vaisvanara, 
Hiranyagarbha,, and Is'vara. The Supreme Being (ParamSt- 
man) manifested in the Antahkarana in its casual form is 
Hiranyagarbha ; in Prana in its casual form is Sfttratman ; 
when manifested through these two vehicles without 
differentiation it is Antaryamin. These three alone are 
termed respectively Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra, We 



130 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


have here explained the three divisions, irig., the individual 
jiva, (Visva, Taijasa and Prajna), the collective Jlva, 
(Vais'vanara, Hiranyagarbha and Shtratman), and Paramftt- 
man, according to the Opinion of those who follow the 
Upanishads. In this theory they accept only three states, 
viz., waking, dreaming, and sleeping, and three functions, 
viz., creation, preservation and destruction. In the 
Tantric theory the followers of it accept in addition two 
more states, viz., ecstatic (Turiya) and the state beyond 
ecstasy, and two functions, viz., Tflrodhana and Anugraha 
(for meaning of these two refer names 270 and 273). 
Those beings endowed with these two states, i.e., fourth 
and the one beyond it and their functions, viz., jiva and 
Is'vara respectively should also be added. Thus there are 
five divisions. 

Here there is no contradictory theory as between 
those who hold that there are three or five causes 1 (of 
creation) because this system proceeds from the distinction 
between the gross and subtle aspects. Since in the sleep¬ 
ing state the Prajna (Jlva is in that state called so) becomes 
Brahman, he is no longer Jiva, but the Jlva is then not the 
Supreme One (Paramatman), because it is associated with a 
trace of avidya. Hence because the vehicle of the Jlva in 
the sleeping State is Karana, the vehicle of the jlva in the 
fourth is declared to be Mahakarana. Beyond that (i.e., in 
fifth state) as the Shiva Sfltra (III, 26) says, “ One above 
it becomes equal to S'iva.” That is Semi-equal to S^iva. 
Beyond that as the S'ruti (Mund. Up., Ill, 1, 3) says, “The 
spotless one attains the highest equality.” Here the 
meaning of highest equality is unity. From this explanation 
it follows that owing to the absence in those two states 
(4th and 5th) of the full perfection of jiva or of S'iva, they 
are not separately enumerated by the followers of the 
Upanishads. Similarly the same reason is given for not 
taking into account the state of swoon in that work. (Ved. 

1 Vide Vedanta SBtra, II, 3,1 to 12, 



Lalita sahAseanama l3i 

Sfttra, III, 2, 13), “In him who is unconscious (in a 
swoon, etc.), there is a half union ; on account of this 
remaining.” 

The five vehicles of Jiva may he recognised as the five 
sheaths (Kos'as) ; the TirodhSna and Anugraha functions 
of IsVara and S'adas’iva are otherwise called the producers 
of bondage and release. These two states beyond' Kudra 
(4th or 5th) are not wrongly stated since they are support¬ 
ed by the Shiva Scriptures. “ Is’vara the visible one 
(Bahih unmesha may mean manifested clearly) and 
Sadasiva is momentary (Ni meshontah, unmanifested or 
partly manifested).” 

‘Vis'varapa : Vi?va, the jivas in the waking state 
manifested through the gross elements ; and VaiSvanara 
is he who is the aggregate of the Jivas. Rapa, form, i.e., 
these two are her forms. 

Or, by the preceding name (255) is meant that she is 
inseparable from the Universe ; hence this name expresses 
that Devi is in the form (.Rapa) of the Universe (Vinrn) ; 
the meaning is that her form is the Universe itself and she 
has no other form except this as the supporter of the 
universe. The Vishnu Pr. says, “Just as the plantain 
tree cannot be seen independently of bark and leaves, 
likewise the universe, 0 Lord, is seen, depending on you 
only.” The Do. Bhag. Pr. also in the first book 
mentions, “I myself am the universe and there is no 
other permanency.” 

Or, Vi, separate, S'varilpa, a dog’s form—the evolution 
of human being (jlvabhava) of Brahman directly is the 
lowest kind of form, comparable to that of a dog ; so, 
inferior service is called SoavritU (dog’s service : see Mann 
Smr.) ; the lower human existence (Paw/bhCmt) is called 
Svarttpa (a dog’s form of the devotees) ; Vi, released by 
means of Devi’s grace. 

Or, Tripurasundarl has sixteen parts, of this there is 
no doubt; this is explained in the Vasanftsubhagodaya. 



132 


LALITA SAHASKANAMk 


“There are fifteen parts (Kalas) from the Dars'a, to 
PflrniinA (the names of the days of bright fortnights), the 
Sixteenth part is to be known as existence-bnowledge-bliss 
(Sat-chit-ananda).” In the moon’s disc there is one Kala 
(the sixteenth) called sada (eternal) devoid of growth or 
decay. The other fifteen are moving to and fro, waxing 
and waning. Though Devi is not separate from any of 
them, the Kala called chit (the sixteenth) is termed Tripura- 
sundari: the others are termed respectively from KamesVari 
to Chitra, according to the days of the fortnights. In the 
PanchadasI Mantra also which is inseparable from these, 
there is one syllable which is to be known from the teacher 
which is of the form of chit and by reason of its being 
contained in the PanchadasI is known as SrlvidyS. The 
fifteen syllables known to all the devotees are of the form 
of NityOs ; thus, the moon’s disc, Devi, and the fifteen- 
syllabled Mantra are one. The fifteen syllables belonging 
to the fifteen Kalas also become one. Hence there are 
three divisions of fifteen days and of the fifteen syllables, 
as the three divisions (klMas) of days, vis., Nanda, Bhadra, 
Jayii, Bikta, and Pttrna, corresponding to the Vagbhava 
group (of the PanchadasI Mantra). Hence the followers of 
Taittarlya S'akha repeat the means of the night s of the 
bright fortnight in three divisions. The S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 
3-10-1) says, “ (1) Dars'a, (2) Drashia, (3) Dars'ata, (4) 
VisVarttpS, and (5) Sndars'ana: (6) Pyayamana, (7) 

ApyAyamana, (8) Pvaya, (9) Sttnrita, (10) Ira : and (11) 
Aphryamans, (12) Phryamarra, (13) POrayanti, (14) Pllrna, 
and (15)_ Pdrnamasl.” Thus they repeat the names of the 
days (of the bright fortnight) also in the three divisions. 
The S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 3-l*0-l, “ (1) Samjnana, (2) Vijnana, 
(3) Prajnana, (4) .lanad, and (5) Abhijanad; (6) Sankalpa- 
mana, (7) Prakalpamana, (8) UpakalpamSna, (9) Upaklipta, 
and (10) Klipta ; and (11) S'reya, (12) Yasiya, (13) Ayat, (14) 
Sambhflta and (15) BhUta.” The S'ruti itself verifies the 
explanation of day and night of (bright fortnight) of these 



Lalita sahasranama 


133 


® two sections ( anuva/rnx ) above quoted. The S'rnti (Tai. 
Bra., 3-10-10) .says, “These two sections, Samjnanu, 
VijnSna, and Dsirs'a, Brasilia, are the names of the days and 
nights of bright fortnights.” Though the three divisions 
are here proportioned equally five in each), yet when 
the 10th 1 day is merged into the eleventh the latter is 
treated as part of the tenth ; as it is said, “ The pure 
twelfth day is to be observed intact.” Consequently the 
twelfth day takes the eleventh. So in the mantra (of 
t’anchadaSl) the second division is composed of six letters, 
whereas the last one has four letters. But as the others 
(seers) make no such exception (Vrdha), in the other 
lnahtras of Stlrya and others (of Panchadasfi), the three 
divisions are equally proportioned. With this idea Lolla 
says in his commentary on the Subhagodaya, “ Though the 
Kala called AptJryamiinii (11th one) which belongs to the 
last group, Chandra Khanrfa, (v.e., Agni, Sttrya and 
Chandra are respectively the deities of the three divisions 
of the mantra) yet it is included in the second division 
(Sftrya-khanr/a), and it should bp. taken that the Kalas, Ira 
and ApftryamSna (10 and 11th) are one and the same as the 
latter is a part of the former.” As to the fifteen deities (of 
days and nights) and the manners of worship as well as the 
use and to the letters for the fifteen s.vallabled mantra, and 
as application to S'iva,' S'akti, Maya, S'uddhavidya, etc., 
according to Sam ay a and Kaula schools these practised, 
should be learned from the Ohandrakala (Tantra). So as 
there is no distinction (between the syllables, the days, 
deities, etc.), so the word Visfva, though it indicates the 
fourth night of the bright fortnight, also means the fourth 
syllable of the first division (called VSgbhava Kflfa) ; for 
the mantra and the Tatva of S'uddhavidya, i.e ., Devi is 

1 Vedlta, i.e., wfien the tenth day (Dan'ami) merges into the 
eleventh (Ekadas'i) even for a few minutes-, that day (the 11th) 
becomes void therefore, the strict observers of vows on that eleventh 
day, leave out that day and discontinue further ceremony till the 
12th day. 



i34 


lAuta sahasranamA 


inseparable from these three (the fourth night, the fourth ® 
syllable and S'nddhavidya). <> 

Or, VLsmrilpn is in the neuter gender, means the fifth 
day of dark fortnight. The S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 3-12-1) says, 

“ (1) Prastuta, (2) VishOrta, (3) Samastuta, (4) Kaly&na, 
and (5) Yisvarllpa ; (6) S'ukra, (7) Amrita, (8) Tejasvin, 

(9) Tejas, and (10) Samiddha ; and (11) Aruna, (12) 
Bhanumat, (13) Marichimat, (14) Abhitapas, and (15) 
Tapasvat.” The nights of the same are “(1) Suta, 

(2) Sunvati, (3) Prasuta, (4) Sflyamana, (5) Abhishfl- 
yamana ; (6) Priti, (7) Prapa, (8) Sampa, (9) Tripti, (10) 
Tarpayanti ; and (11) Kanta, (12) Kamya, (13) KSmajata, 

(14) Ayushmati, and (15) Kamadhugha.” The Prastuta, 
VisMuta, the Suta, Sunvatl these two sections are the names 
of the days and nights of the dark fortnight.” The meaning 
is Devi is manifested in the form of all the deities of the 
nights and of the days (of bright and dark fortnights). 
Hence one who knows them acquires special merits, so the 
S'ruti declares. (The S'ruti Tai, Bra. 3-13-10) also says, 

“ One who knows the deities who produce honey and 
saturate the body with it, in him is produced honey from 
the Baindava. His sacrifices and good works become 
effective. To him who is ignorant, they produce no honey 
and his sacrifices and good works become ineffective.” 
Produce tioney, the deities of nights, and saturate the body 
with it, those of the days. For the S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 3-10-10) 
says, “ Those nights of the bright and dark fortnights are 
the producers of honey (Madhukrit) ; their days cause it to 
flow (Madhuvarshinl).” Sacrifices and good works : devo¬ 
tional work. 

‘ When the place of i5akinl and other deities (refer for 
Dakini, etc., names 484 to 534) is saturated by the waking 
up of Kundalini, by causing the honey to fi<$w (in S&hasrara), 
whatever works he does become effective, external actions ; ___^ 
such as sacrifice, etc., become fruitful. In the absence of 
that (flow) in which time the actions are performed, that 




LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


135 


time ia productive of death of these actions (?.«.), they 
become ineffective. This* is explained in the Chandra- 
jnana Tr. “ Of those who are able to produce the flow of 
honey in the Baindava and whose bodies are cool (by the 
nectar), the sacrifices and good works become fruitful in 
course of time. Of those who are devoid of the inner flow 
and whose minds continue scorched, death at once terminates 
all their actions. The consumer of time alone (Devi) 
produces honey and causes it to flow. To him who knows, 
comes the flow of nectar from the Bralimarandhra. Yaidehl 
(S’rividya belonging to Videha, Manmatha) who is SaraghS 
(lit. bee,) and who is the destroyer of time, has created 
through the days and nights (of deities of bright and 
dark fortnights) this Yidya (indicated) by the fifteen 
syllables.” 

Kalakarshinl , the destroyer of time, is the name of a 
deity. One who Jcnoivs, the distinction, viz., that between 
tnadhukrit, as the night deities, and madhuvarshinl as 
those of day. Vaidehl, the wife of Yideha, Karnes's. This 
Vidya, Panchadas'T. S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 3-10-9) says, “ The 
founder Vaideha, composed the weeks, of the day and night 
deities by (fifteen syllable, of the mantra).” Saragha, 
honey bees ; Devi is also called a bee because she produces 
honey. The S'ruti (Tai. Bra. 3-10-10) says, “ She (Devi) 
is bee, fire is the honey.” 

257. Waking state. (Jagarini.) 

It is explained in the Ikvarapratyabhijna ; “ The 

waking state dear to all, is the source of an external action 
through the activity of the senses.” The Jiva is called 
Jagari, he who takes upon himself the gross body 

called Vis'va. 

258. Dreaming state. (Svapanati.) 

The'explanation of the dreaming state is also given in 
the Pratyabhijna ; “ The state of Svapna is objectifying of 
those visions, which are perceived in the mind, due to the 
perception of ideas latent in the mind.” Jiva in the state 



136 


LAMTA SAHABRAXAMA 


of Svapna is termed Taijasa ; its individuality is merged m 
the subtle body. * 

259. She is Taijasa itself. (Taijagatmikft.) 

Taijasa called Hiranygarbha who is the collective form 

of the Jlvas described above (No. 258). (62) 

260. State of sleep. (Supta.) 

The description of it is given in the Siva Sutra (1,10). 
“The state of sleep is incapacity of discrimination, vie., 
illusion.” One says “ I slept happily, I know nothing,” 
thus one says from recollection. By this saying, three 
modifications of Avidya are indicated; viz., ignorance, 
egoism, and happiness ; sound sleep is that state in which 
these three exist; such a person is termed Prdjna whose 
individuality is merged in the causal body. 

261. Prajna itself. (Prajnatmika.) 

Prdjna, Isvara who is the collective form of the jlvas 
above described (No. 260). 

262. State of ecstasy. (Turya). 

Turya state is the state in which the experience called 
.Snddhavidya is acquired and the result of discrimination 
of these {lower) three states and enjoyers thereof. The 
Spanda S'astra says, “ He who perceives the object of 
attainment in the three abodes and the subject thereof, 
though he participates in it, yet remains unpolluted.” 
Varadaraja also says, “ Turiya is the supreme abode, the 
participation in that state produces astonishment. Though 
there are different states, vis., waking and others, this 
(only) is realistic for the Yogin.” The Siva Sfitra (I, 7) 
also says, “ Though there are different states, vis., waking, 
dreaming, and sleeping, (.real) enjoyment exists only in the 
fourth one. Ecstasy in the fourth state should be allowed 
like oil to permeate the other three.” The Jiva is called 
he who is merged in the great causal body (Mahakarana). 
Devi is called Turiya, because she is both the individual 
and the collective, form of this state. The means of 
attaining the state of Turiya is set forth by a Siva (Sutra, 



tALITA sahasranama 


137 


I, 15). “ He should project his mind by means of his own 

thought.” (The commeiftary on this is as follows) : 
“Abandoning 1 PrSnaySma and other uncertain gross 
means, * by his own thought’ by his own knowledge, by 
the internal experience of astonishment, i.e., by the aid of 
Turiya, extinguishing the notion of body, etc., in conse¬ 
quence of merging himself (into the fourth state), this 
should he enter.” 

Or, Turly & is a deity according to the S'akti rahasya as 
described in the S'ruti (Man. Up., 7), “ They consider the 
fourth calmness, non-dual.” Acharya (Saun. La. SI. 97). 

“ Thou art Turiya, unlimited mystery, difficult of 
attainment.” The Tripura Siddhanta says, “ 0 fair-faced 
one, as she is a pleasure to TurlySnandanatha (a certain 
teacher) Devi is known by the name Turiya.” 

14th verse divides 40 names. 

263. Transcending all the states. (Sarvavasthavivar jita.) 

There is a fifth state of Jivas but as it has no special 
name and as it is beyond the Tnriya state, it is simply 
called, ‘ beyond Turiya ’ ; this name indicates the fifth state ;. 
all the states, i.e. , those described above. Because when a man 
transcends the fourth state, he necessarily transcends the 
other three. Vivarjita transcending : Vi, entirely, that 
is one does not return to the other states. This state also 
has two aspects, the individual and the collective. This 
fifth state arises from firmness in the fourth one (Turiya). 
For it is said, “The supreme state which is beyond the 
Turiya is only to be attained through a firm hold on the 
Turiya.” VaradarSja, the com. also, “ The aspirant, by 
much familiarity with the fourth state attains the state 
which transcends the fourth one, and becomes equal to 
S'iva who is the soul of the Universe and who is pure 
absolute bliss.” There are three Sutras (in the S'iva Stltras, 
III, 27,28 and 29) : describing the, nature of the man who 
1 There is another reading Kritm'i then after performing the Pra- 
nayftma and other gross mean r.. 



138 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


has attained the fifth state. “His physical life is a religious 
observance ; his conversation is Japa ; his giving is know* 
ledge of Self.” His physical life is religious and not 
worldly (lit. trifling) because it is the means of worshipping 
S'iva by searching into his own soul. So Bhaiiotpala 
desires physical life in these words : “ Let me have this 
body invigorated by the nectar of pure Sakti manifested in 
me, for the sake of worshipping thee.” His random 
conversation is Japa, because his mind has grasped the 
truth. It is explained by two Sutras (Yoga Sfitra, I, 47 
and 48). “ In the purity of the non-deliberative condition 
his soul becof&es pleased. In that condition knowledge 
becomes truth supporting (Ritambhara).” As the S'ruti 
says, “Whatever one thinks in his mind, that alone he 
speaks ” ; all his words are in the form of mantras because 
his thoughts are pure. The Yogavasishiha says, “ The 
wise should always be approached, whether they instruct 
or not; because their ordinary conversation becomes 
instruction.” Gift, (or giving): Krishnadasa says, “The 
t direct experience of Atman described above as conscious¬ 
ness (Chaitanya) itself, is the knowledge which is his gift 
and which, with promptness, he freely gives.” Acharva, 
(Sau. La. Slo. 27) considering that these three Sutras are to 
be explained as above, says, “ The random talk is Japa, 
his bodily actions are the mudr&s, etc . , .” The Vartika 
explains, “ Thus one performing the vow herein described, 
and repeating mantras, and maintaining (his physical 
existence), and equal to S'iva, always being in his own 
Atman, devoted to the adoration of S^iva, alone he is called 
the great Yogin devoted to the practice of mighty Mantras, 
he imparts real knowledge to his disciples.” 

264. Creator. (Srish/ikartrl.) 

Thus after the description of the five divisions of Jivas 
who are controlled by AvidyS, he proceeds according 
to different functions, to describe the five divisions of 
IsVara who controls Mitya, Acharya also explains the same 



LALITA SARASRANAMA 139 

in the verse (Sau. La. 21). “Brahma creates the world, 
etc.” Creation is the function of Isvara when the Rajas 
quality predominates. 

265. In the form of Brahma. (BrahmarOpa.j 

The Brahma, the four-faced one. The Vishnu Pr. 
says, “ 0 Brahman, Brahma, Vishnu, and S'iva, are the 
chief S'aktis of Brahman." 

266. Protector. (Goptrl.) 

Sustaining the universe. This is the function of 
is 1 vara when the Satva quality predominates. 

267. In the form of Govinda. (Govindarftpini.) 

In the Harivams'a, Narad a says, “ The®first portion of 
Praknti the famous Devi called Urna. (The second one) 
the manifested Vishnu, the all-pervading, protector of the 
universe, is known as woman.” 

Concerning the word Govinda, Vi. Bkag. Pr. says, “ I 
am the lord (Indra) of the Devas, thou hast attained to the 
lordship over the cows ; hence in the world men praise 
thee by the name Govinda.” 

The Bharata, in Mokshadharma, also, “ As 1 recovered 
the earth which was taken away and rendered inaccessible, ’ 
I am praised by devas and by words under the name of 
Govinda.” The Harivams'a says, “The gati,. stands for 
sound; which you (alone) know (aid) ; hence you are 
called Govinda by the aseetics.” 

Or, Govindct, BrihaSpati (the Guru of the Devas) ; 
according to the VisvaprakSs'a, “ Govinda means Vasudeva, 
cowherd, and Brihaspati.” (63) 

268. Destroyer. (Samharini). 

Samhfira, reducing the universe into atoms. This is 
the function of Is'vara when the Tamas quality 
predominates. 

269. In the form of Rudra. (RudrarQpa,) 

Rudra is the above mentioned Isvara. 

Or, Rudra, who drives away sorrow ; or, weep, 
(Rodati) because the rain which comes at the dissolution 



iio 


lAlita sahasranAma 


of the universe originates from his solar eye in the form 
of tears. The S'ruti (Tai.. Ham.), “He wept; because he 
wept, he is called the weeper (Kndra).” The Sivarahasya 
also says, “ The Lord of Pas'us (jivas) is called Rudra 
because he drives away sorrow.” 

Or, according to the Chch. Up. (3-16-3), “ The Pranas 
(senses) are the rudras, these cause all this (body) to cry 
out.” The Bharata says, “ To please, (his parent) the son 
of Brahma, the eternal lord of the universe, springing from 
his forehead wept loudly and terribly.” The Vayavlya- 
samhita says, “ Ru, means pain, or, the cause of pain, he 
who drives this out, ( dra ), S'iva, the supreme cause, is 
called Rudra.” 

270. Disappearance. (Tirodhanakarl.) 

Tirodhdna, complete destruction, i.e., the absorption 

even of the atoms into Prakriti like the extinction of a 
light. This is the function of IsVara when the pure con¬ 
centrated Satva.quality predominates. 

Or, she is in the form of a S'akti called Tiraskariui. 
The TripurasiddhSnta says, “ Because you cause the 
disappearance of all who are not devotees, rightly, 0, 
fair-faced one, you are called Tiraskarini.” 

271. levari. (Ruler.) 

The previously mentioned one. 1/fvara is here used 
in a special sense just as Mayd is used in different sense. 
The Supreme individuality (Parahanta) is the quality 
of IsVara. This is explained in the Yirflpakshapan- 
chas'ika in the Vis'vas'arira chapter, “Lordship, activity, 
independence, consciousness itself. These are said 
by wisemen as the successive aspects of the Supreme 
individuality.” 

272. Sadas'iva. When the superlative Satva quality 
predominates she is so called. 

273. Conferrer of blessing. (Anugrahada.) 

Anugralm, when, after complete annihilation, the 

universe again assumes the form of the primordial atoms 



LALltA SAbASRANAMA l4i 

the, process is called, Amtgraha. This is the function of 
SadSs'iva. 

Or, Tirodhilna (270) and Anugraha, mean respective¬ 
ly bondage and release. In this meaning Is'vara and 
Sadas’iva who are respectively the external and the 
internal manifestations, are the causes of. bondage and 
release. 

274. Devoted to the five functions. (Panchakritya- 
parayana). 

According to the Vis'va, “ Parayana, means, fond of, 
devoted to, and dependent.” The Mrigendra Sam. says, 
“ That (Brahman) is one cause of the origin, preservation, 
destruction and annihilation of the universe and of the 
order of the existence of elements and beings.’’ The other 
Agamas also say, “ The five functions of him are the 
creation, preservation, destruction, annihilation, and caus¬ 
ing the re-appearance of the universe which manifests 
incessantly.’’. The De. Bliiig. Pr., IV, says, 11 She creates 
the universe, she protects, she destroys what she protects 
at the end of the cycle ; she it.is who in her three forms 
bewilders the universe. Brahma united with her creates 
the universe, Vishnu united with her protects, Rudra 
united with her destroys. She binds the whole universe 
and holds bewildered by the noose of illusion, 0 king, by 
the firm noose of ‘ I ’ and ‘ Mine ’. Yogins released from 
worldly attachments, desiring liberation and seeking after 
emancipation, worship the beneficent Devi alone, the 
ruler of the universe.’’ Acharya also (Saun. La. SI. 24), 
“Brahma creates the universe, etc.,’’ the S’akti Stttra also, 
“ Thus like that (she) exercises the five functions.” The 
next Stttra. describes the characteristics of them, vis., 
“ Illumination (creation), affection (preservation), dis¬ 
satisfaction (destruction), planting the seed (causing re¬ 
appearance)* and lamentation (annihilation).” The Reader 
is referred to the PratyabhijnSthridaya for the meaning 
of them. (64) 



142 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


275. Abiding in the midst of the son's disc. (Bhanu- 
manrfala madhyastha.) 

In the Sandhya time Devi should be meditated npon 
that. The Vedanta Sfitra (I, 1, 20) explains the S’ruti 
fChchan. Up. I, 6, 6). “The golden man seen within the 
sun, etc.,” as the supreme Lord. The Karma Pr. by the 
hymns composed to Devi, by Himavat says, “ I bow down 
to the form which is in the sun’s disc, who is all the Vedas, 
the one object of knowledge, who fills the different worlds 
with bis brilliance, the cause of the three worlds, known 
as the supreme Lord." 

Or, ‘ Bhanumancfala ’ is the Anahata lotus. 

276. Bairavl. 

Wife of Bhairava, i.e., Paramas'iva. 

Or, Bhairava, all women taken collectively (Bhlru, 
women). The Linga Pr. says, “Meaning is S'iva, words 
are Devi; day is S'iva and Night is Devi " ; from that—after 
describing Arundhatl, Anasfiya, S'achl, the wife of Indra, 
etc., each' as the manifestations of Devi, thus concludes ; 
“ All things indicated by the words in the feminine gender 
are manifestations of Devi/’ 

Or, in the TripurSchakresVari Mantra, in the middle 
division, when K is eliminated, it is known as Bhairavi- 
mantra. 

Or, according to Dhaumya, a girl of twelve years old 
is called Bhairavl. 

277. Wearing the garland of prosperity. (Bhaga- 
miUinl.) 

Bhaga, means six attributes (refer for the meaning 
No, 279), and Malinl, possessor. 

Or, she is the female emblem (Bhaga). Thus the 
Linga and De. Bhag. Prs., “Those who have the male 
emblem are the manifestations of S'iva ; and those having 
the female emblem are the manifestations of Devi.” 

Or, BhagamMinl is one of the fifteen Nitya deities. 
In this mantra the word Bhaga occurs more frequently 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


143 


according to the school of the Dakshinamtlrti than to those 
of TantrarSja and JnSnarnava. The names of surrounding 
the deities (Svaranadevatas) of that (mantra) also are 
preceded mostly by the word Bhaga ; hence she has the 
garland (Maya) of Bhaga (words). 

278. Seated on the .lotus. (Padmasana.) 

The wife of Brahma. 

Or, Padma, lotus, of it; the leaves are Prakritis, the 
filaments are the categories, the stalk is knowledge, etc. ; 
such is her seat. 

Or, Padma, Lakshml, the goddess of wealth, Sana,, 
distributing. The great men have said, “ O beneficent 
mother, in whom thou art pleased that man receives 
prosperity containing of the enjoyment of supreme bliss ; 
his house becomes beautiful and contains much gold, and 
sitting on his couch he fondles his wife ; and when thou 
art angry, that man becomes supremely miserable, his 
house appears without beauty and in it there is much 
lamentation and his couch becomes deserted.” 1 ' 

Or, Padma, the Daitya.S'ftrapadma, Sana, to kill, i.e., 
the Slayer of the Daitya, Padmasura. 

Or, Padma, the bindu, etc. The Rabhasa says, 
“ Padma means lotus, numbers called Vyftha, Niddhi and 
bindu,” they should be applied in this sense. 

279. Bhagavati. 

The Prs. say, “The full Supremacy, righteousness, 
fame, prosperity, wisdom, discrimination, these six are 
called Bhaga.” The Kos’a says, “ Bhaga means supremacy, 
magnanimity, wisdom, dispassion, womb, fame, power, 
effort, desire, righteousness, prosperity, and worldly 
concerns ” ; these are in Devi. The De. Bhag. Pr. says, 
“ As she knows the origin and dissolution, the going and 
coming of beings, knowledge and ignorance, she is called 
Bhagavati.” The S'aktirahas'ya says, “The root Bhaj 

1 According to the peculiar construction of the words ‘prosperity ’ 
and • adversity ’ a double meauing is conveyed. 




144 


LA1ITA SAHASRASAMA 


derived from the word worship, she who is worshipped 
by all Devas and she blesses them, hence she is called 
Bhagavntl.” 

280. Sister of Vishnu. (Padmanabha sahodarl.) 

The one Brahman assumed two forms, viz. , attributes 

(Dharma) and the possessor of them ; again attributes 
become two, viz., male and female, the male is Vishnu 
wiio is the material cause of the whole universe; the 
female became the spouse of Paramas'iva. The secret of 
the S'aiva theory is that these three in combination become 
the one indivisible Brahman. This theory is well mention¬ 
ed in the Kfirma and other Prs. and is explained in detail 
in the RatnatrayaparikshA by Appaya Dlkshita. The 
Brahil. Pr. in the Purushottamakshetra M&h&t-mya says, 

1 Subhadra, who was born from the womb of Menaka in a 
former birth, in this birth was born along with Krishna 
of Devakl.” “ Let there be victory to Vishnu, the 
husband of Subhadra,” there Subhadra, is Lakshml and 
there is no contradiction, or, in reality there is no 
difference. In an other place-, “ Brahma, the grandsire of 
all the worlds, in order to see Devi, once performed a 
severe penance in the sacred Kanchl ; Tripura, standing on 
a lotus, having a lotus in her hand, with her victorious 
brother appeared to the ascetic, performing the severe 
penance, fixed in meditation on the higher Self. 

Or, this contains the Vagbhva (first) division of 
Kadividya (Panchadas'l) ; Padmascma (278) indicates the 
syllable Ka ; Bhac/a, E, and vatl, (279) Kamakala (*.«., 
7) Padman&bha, sa and hoda, Ha and M and rl make 
Hrim. This is the secret meaning. (65) 

281. The series of worlds arise and disappear with 
the opening and shutting of Her eyes. (Unmeshanimi- 
shotpanna vipanna bhuvanavalih.) 

Since the eyes of Devi never close the expression 
“opening and shutting” refer to the influence of the 
destiny of beings, or to her mere wish, The Ajnavatara 



LAMTA S AH ASK AN AM A 


145 


says, “By her mere wish the whole universe appears and 
disappears.” “ The creation of the supreme is simply the 
expression of His wish.” Kalidasa also says, “ The 
universe consisting of the seer, the seen and the seeing, 
with all its parts, existed in you before you thought (of 
creation). At the manifestation of the universe at your 
will, your eyes open, at the destruction of the universe 
(at your will) your eyes shut.” 

Gorakshanatha in his Mahslrthamanjari says, “The 
moment occupied by the Highest Teacher in the creation 
is the same as that occupied in the destruction of the 
universe.” 

‘282. Thousand headed and thousand faced. (Sahasra- 
tfirshavadana.) 

The S'ruti (Purushasflkta) says, “ Purusha is thousand 
headed, thousand eyed and thousand footed.” Thousand 
means unlimited. The Bh. Gita (XIII—13) has the same. 

283. Thousand eyed. (Sahasrakshi). 

284. Thousand footed. (Sahasrapad.) 

The De. Bhag. Pr. (Book III), “ Devi, having thou¬ 
sands of eyes, thousands of hands, thousands of heads and 
feet, vividly shines forth.” 

Or, in this (281 to 284) contain the second and last 
divisions of the mantra ( Panchadas'l ). 

Bhuvanavali (281) indicates the two BhuvanesVarl 
bijas. Sahadsrakshl (283) la, and sahastra. (284) ha and 
**. ( 66 ) 

285. Mother of all from Brahma to worm. (Abrah- 
makl/a jananl.) 

Brahma, a Jiva called Hiranyagarbha who is the gross 
form of humanity taken collectively ; KUa, is the small 
insect eater of the spider’s thread ; in the Vaidya Sftstras 
KUa is called Stainba meaning two kinds of parasitical 
worms, viz., Kakeru and K&makern. 

286. .She who establishes the castes and orders (of 
life). (Variifts’ramavidhayinl.) 

19* 



146 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


Thus she becomes the Vedas, which are he* own 
commands, in order to lead the created Jlvas into the right 
path. The Vedas are divided into two parts, the Karma* 
kanrfa and the Brahma Kanda ; as according to the rule, 
the devas and lower animals have no share in the Karma- 
kantfa, the (divine) Mother established righteousness 
(Dharma) through KarmakSnda after dividing men into 
four castes and four orders. The Kflrma Pr. after the 
praise of Devi by Himavat, says, “ Devi, the life of the 
Universe having heard his words, remembering her 
husband (S'iva) answered her father with a smile. 0 Lord 
of mountains, hear from me this doctrine, which is 
supreme, secret, known to Isvara only, practised by 
Brahmavadins alone . . . describing the Cleans of 

attaining ... by meditation. Karma Yoga, devotio.n, 
and wisdom, 0 Lord of mountains, this is to be attained by 
these means, not by crores of other actions (Karmas) : ” 
thus concluding again she says in order to describe Karma 
Yoga . . . “ Karma is ordained by the Srutis and 

Smritis according to castes and orders ; always perform 
this Karma associated with the knowledge of the Self, for 
the sake of liberation. Devotion arises from righteousness 
(Dharma), by devotion the supreme is attained. Dharma 
means sacrifice, etc., ordained by S'rutis and Smritis. 
Dharma is not to be otherwise known, because from 
Vedas alone Dharma came into existence ; hence the aspir¬ 
ant for liberation should depend on the Vedas which are 
my form, for the sake of Dharma. By my command the 
divine Brahma, for the sake of protecting the Vedas, 
created the Brfthmanas at the beginning and established 
them in their respective duties.” 

287. The Vedas are the expression of Her command. 
(Nijajnarllpa nigama.) 

Ajnd, command, is ascertained by the knowers of the 
Vedas through reflection on the words (of the Vedas) what 
set forth the object to be attained, the means and the 



LALltA SAHASRANAMA iil 

practical directions, by giving out the real meaning, 
meditation and praise ; these, three belong to the Karma- 
kAnrfa part of the Vedas. Hence Jaimini (I, 1, 22) says, 
“ (The words which refer to) past things are to be taken 
with (those which refer to) action." The Kftrma Pr., 
“ The ancient and supreme energy called Vedas, which are 
my commandments, are manifested at the beginning of 
creation in the form of Rig, Yajus and Saman.” 

Or, there are twenty-eight S'aiva Tantras beginning 
with KSmika which follow the Vedas. There are some 
more scriptures beginning with KApala, Bhairava which 
are opposed to the Vedas. Of these two which follow 
the Vedas are here meant by Nigama; as they sprung 
from the mouth of Parames'vara, they are said to be the 
fqym of my command ; those (Kapalika, etc.) which 
Sprang from below the navel (of S'iva) are opposed to 
the Vedas. This is explained in the De. . Bhag. and 
Skanda Prs., “The five Tantras beginning with kamika 
have sprung from the Sadyojata face (of S'iva) ; the five 
Tantras Dipta, etc., from the Vamadeva face ; the five, 
Vijaya, etc., from the Aghora face ; the five, Vairochana, 
etc., from the east face (Tatpurusha) ; and the eight 
Tantras, Prodgita and others from the ts'ana face ; these 
have Sprung from the upward current and the others from 
the current below the navel.” 

288. Giver of results, good and bad. (Punyapunyar 
phala prads.) 

When the Veda is established in the form of righteous¬ 
ness through castes and orders, the Mother, in order to con¬ 
firm that establishment, gives the good and bad results arising 
from ordained and prohibited actions respectively. .The 
respective resnlts of good and bad actions are heaven and 
hell. The Kttrma Pr. says, “ Those who do not perform 
good actions as established, there are hells created by 
Brahma into which by my command Yama (the Lord of 
Death) throws them. Those who are devoted to me and 



IjALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Us 

perform the duty prescribed by the Vedas, are by my com¬ 
mand brought by Indra and others into Svarga and other 
places.’’ It is said in other works also : “ Led by Itfvara 
(alone) one goes to heaven or to hell.” The Sivarahasya 
says also, “ When the sacrifice sleeps (is finished) yon alone 
remain awake in order to grant the result to the sacrificer.” 
The S'ruti also says (Kaush. Up. Ill, 8), “ For He makes 
him perform good actions whom he.wishes to lead upwards, 
and He alone makes him, whom he wishes to lead down¬ 
wards, perform bad actions.’’ The same is expressed in the 
Vedanta Sfitra (III, 2, 38), “ From him the fruit (of works), 
for that only is possible ” ; as regards partiality and mer¬ 
cilessness of the Lord the same Ved.Sti. (II, 1, 34) men¬ 
tions, “ Partiality and mercilessness cannot be attributed on 
account of his regarding (merit and demerit).” The Sanya 
Sam. also says, “ Kighteousness and unrighteousness depend 
on the doer and produce their respective results without 
Mahadeva exercising any (influence). This is not so . . . 
The verse beginning with “Rightly solicited” till the 
close of the chapter describing the Antaryami brihmana 
(residing in all) concludes thus : “ S'iva is to be attained by 
reasoning supported by the scriptures. Hence Siva directly 
confers the results of righteousness and unrighteousness.” 

(67) 

289. The dust of Her lotus feet forms the vermilion 
mark on the parting of the hair on the head of the Vedas 
(personified as goddesses). (S'ruti simanta sindftrikrita 
padabjadhQlika.) 

Thus after describing the Karmakanrfa part as devoted 
to rites (sacrifices and other performances), he now sets forth 
the explanation of the established fact of Brahmakancfe also 
(■/>., Brahman is S'iddhavastu) through the Mother’s 
command alone. 

The, expression dusl means that the Vedas are unable 
to explain the real form of Devi by direct assertions, by 
complete definition (a rule called S'ringa grahika), describe 




14 9 


LALITA SAHASRANASf A 

Her by the method of negation, like one ashamed and 
afraid, Standing afar, describing inadequately, that (descrip¬ 
tion also) creates no clear idea as to ‘ this or that This is 
explained in our Sivastava. ‘ ‘ The all-wise scriptures, 0 
Parama Siva, much beloved by you do not adequately 
describe you, like a woman silent from shame. If they 
negative all your attributes by often saying, not this, not 
that, who else can declare thee to be ‘ this or that,’ certainly 
nol mere men like myself.” 

290. The pearl (composing nose ring) is enclosed in a 
shell (composed) of the collected scriptures. (Sakalagama- 
sandoha s'uktisampufa manktika.) 

The Scriptures when they describe (Brahman) by 
positive tlefinition, only prove it by characteristics, by the 
method of approximation (ArundhatlnySya, i.e., arundhatl 
is a very small star and by locating the surrounding big 
stars one at last perceives it). 

Pearl expression indicates her attributes (Dharma) of 
creation, etc. The Scriptures describe only her nose pearl 
and other jewels and not her real nature. Because the 
S'ruti (Tai. Up, II, 9), “ Whence all speech 1 with the mind 
turns away without being able to reach it.” 

By the previous name it is indicated that she is to be 
worshipped by the first three castes. This name indicates 
that she is to be worshipped by the fourth caste also. 
For the Rudrayamala says, “ The abode indicated by the 
Vedas is also indicated by other scriptures ; hence all 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vais'yas and S'bdras are fit (to 
worship).” (68) 

291. Granting the objects of men. (PnrusharthapradS.) 

Artha, the four objects of human desire. The Brahma. 

Pr. says, “Those who worship the Supreme S'akti whether 
properly or improperly, are certainly not in Samssra but 
are liberated souls. Hence no castes conjointly attain 

’ According to Bhaskarariiya ‘ all speech ’ means the four kinds of 
speech, namely. Pari, Pas'yanti, madhyama and Vaikhari. 



150 


liALi'fA SAHASKANAMA 


prosperity and release without the adoration of Tripura 
(Devi).” 

Or, Purusha, S'iva, as the S'ruti (Tai. Sam.) says, 
“ Purusha is Kudra.” Artha, liberation, that is, the 
worship of the unconditioned Brahman and the results 
thereof depend on S'akti alone. 

292. The fullness. fPtirna.) 

As she is free from the limitations of time, place and 
circumstance. The S'ruti (Bri. Up. V, 1), “That (Brahman) 
is fullness ; this is fullness ; this fullness proceeds from 
that fullness ; on grasping the fullness of this fullness, the 
fullness alone remains.” 

Or, Puma, means the fifth, tenth, fifteenth, NityS 
deities, the fourteenth bright night, also the name of a river. 

293. The enjoyer. (.Bhoginl.) 

Bhogini is the name of a female Serpent (Nagakanya). 

294. Ruler of the universe. (Bhuvanes'yari.) 

Blmvana fourteen worlds, or water. Or, Bhuvanefvarl 

is the deity, indicated by the syllable Hrlm, or she is in 
the form of Hrlm. 

The Tripurasiddhanta says, “ The great ruler, the wife 
of S'iva, is called Bhuvanes'vari, because she has blessed 
Bhuvananandanatha (a guru) and because she is highly 
celebrated in all the worlds.” Bhuvananandanatha is one 
of the gurus, included under Manavaugha (vide supra, 
I, 37 com.). 

Or, Bhuvanes'vari I: n the Chapter Ghatergalayantra on 
the Dakshinamflrti Sam. it is said, “ 0 ruler of the Devas, 
in one syllable there are many worlds ... in the syllables 
Ha, etc., from which are composed the words Hrlm, etc., 
... in the (Ha) the blja of the (syllables of) ether, Kailasa 
and other regions are established,” and describing the 
origin of each world, concluded, “ Hence 0 great ruler, 
thou art called Bhuva-nOdhlKvarV' Again “from the 
word Ha sprang the ether, from the fourth svara the 
air ...” thus describing the creation of the universe, 



LALITA SAHASKAKAMA 151 

concludes, “ Hence thou art called Bhuvanesl.” Thus two 
explanations are given. 

295, The mother. (Ambika.) 

The mother of the Universe. Or, Ambika means 
Bharatl, the goddess of speech, and earth ; Or, Ambika, 
the aggregate of S'aktis of Ichcha, Jnana, and Kriya which 
are the form of Rudrani. Or Ambika means either night or 
sleep. The Vis'va says, “ Ambika, means deceit, perfec¬ 
tion, sleep, and night.” 

In the Skanda in the Navaratrapradlpa it is said, 
“Night is the great Devi, and the day is S'iva.” The 
Harlvams'a also, “Maya, the great deceiver, known in the 
world as sleep. Her body is night which creates darkness 
and destroys the day, the consume] 1 of half the life of 
beings in the world, being terrible. There is none equal 
to her . . . except Vishnu, none among the Devas can 
control her.” The Mark. Pr. also says, “ I praise the divine 
sleep of Vishnu, of unequalled power, the ruler of the 
Universe, the supporter of the world, and the cause of 
preservation and destruction.” 

29(j. Having neither beginning nor end. (An&di- 
nidhana.) 

Or, according tc the system of Vararuehi n&di or adi 
means eighty (i.e., da=8, and na or «=0) ; hence she 
whose worship delivers a man from the eighty causes of 
death. These (eighty) are divided into two as Pas's and 
Vadha. The latter is of twenty-eight kinds, as the Vishnu 
Pr. says, “ The egoism and self-conceit are of twenty-eight 
kinds.” The former (Pas's) is of fifty-two kinds, as the 
Linga Pr. says, “There are fifty-two Pas'as arising from 
the knot of avidya.” Thus eighty. Of these the explana¬ 
tion off the Vadha is given in the Sankhya Tantra. “ But 
disability is of twenty-eight kinds. Requieseenee is of 
nine kinds. Perfection is of eight kinds.” (San. Sfltra, 
III, 3X to 4(1.) The meaning of these is given in the 
Karikas (of lttvara Krishna S'lo. 49, 50 and 51), “ Depravity 




152 


LAtITA BAHA9BAHAMA 


of the eleven organs, together with injuries of the intellect 
are pronounced to be disability (Akakti). The injuries of 
intellect are seventeen, by inversion of acquiescence and per¬ 
fectness. Nine kinds of acquiescence are propounded ; four 
internal relating to himself are, viz., Prakriti (nature), 
TJpftdana (reception), Kala (time), and Bhagya (luck), and 
the other five perfectnesses are relative to abstinence (from 
enjoyment) of the external objects, reasoning, bearing, 
studying scriptures, the suppression of three kinds of pain, 
acquisition of friends and liberality, these are the eight 
kinds of perfection. The above-mentioned three (akakti, 
tushti and siddhi) are the first obstacles to perfection.” 
AfSakti means inability of the senses to receive their res¬ 
pective objects, defects caused by blindness, deafness, etc. ; 
they are eleven because ? there are eleven senses. 

Tushti (elation) is of two kinds, internal and external. 
The internal is of four kinds. First (when a man says), 

‘ I am liberated by the absorption of mind in the eightfold 
prakriti ’ ; this is called Prakriti elation. The second is 
(when a man says) ‘ I have Succeeded on merely receiving 
the robes of an ascetic ’ ; this is called Up&d&na elation ; 
the third is (when one says), ‘ What is the use of painful 
meditation ? success will come with time ’ ; this is called 
Kala elation. The last is (when one says), ‘ Success will 
come by the intervention of God ’ ; this is called Bhagya 
(luck elation). These are all internal because in connec¬ 
tion with himself. 

The external ( Tushti) elation is of five kinds corres¬ 
ponding to the five kinds of objective senses, .vis., sound, 
touch, etc. The faults belonging to each objective sense 
are the acquiring, keeping, spending, wasting, etc., of 
earthly wealth. One kind of elation arises when after 
observing the disadvantages attached to the gratification of 
objective senses, he ceases their pursuit. Thus there are 
nine (elations). The separate names of each (of these) 
from Salila to Uttambha, and the names of each Siddhi 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


153 


from Tftra to Samudita must be ascertained from proper 
books. 

The eight kinds of Siddhis : tfha (reasoning) means 
understanding the meanings without being taught. S'abda 
(hearing) understanding the meaning by simply hearing 
the words. Adhyayana (study), understanding real mean¬ 
ing from the Guru’s teaching. The other three Siddhis are 
the reverse of the three kinds of misery, concerning him¬ 
self, concerning Devas, and concerning the elements. 
(Adhyatma, Adhibftta and Adhidaivata.) By gaining good 
friends, he attains Arthasiddhi. And the last (elation) 
arises from serving ascetics and the learned. To these 
seventeen there are seventeen reversions (or oppositions). 
The names of them are beginning with Asleya, and ending 
with Pramudita which should be’ ascertained from the 
proper books. 

These seventeen are also called incapacity (As’akti), 
and the injuries of intellect (Buddhivadha) ; these (seven¬ 
teen) added to the injuries of the eleven senses they make 
up twenty-eight Vadhas. The arrangement of these is 
given in the VAyu Pr., “The eighth creation called 
Anugraha is fourfold, viz., Viparyaya (invertion), incapa¬ 
city (As'akti), Siddhi (perfectness) and Tushti (elation). 
The first is by inversion (leading into) the unstable 
creation ; by incapacity, the animal kingdom, by perfect¬ 
ness, hoyran beings, by elation, the Devas.” 

297. Attended by Hari, Brahma and Indra. (Hari- 
brahmendra sevita.) 

In the S'rlchakra ( Nagcira ), in the centre between the 
seventeenth and the eighteenth walls, is the seat of Vishnu ; 
between the sixteenth and the seventeenth, is of Brahma ; 
between tbe fourteenth and the fifteenth, is of Indra and 
other Lokapalas (protectors of the world). All these reside 
(in their respective places) for the sake of worshipping 
Devi. The De. Bh3g. Pr. says, “ Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, 
Indra, Varuna, Yama, Vayu, Agni, Kubera Tvasbta, Posha, 



154 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


As'vins, Bhaga, Adityas, Vagus, Rudras, VisVectevas, 
Marutganas, all these meditate on Devi, the cause of 
creation, preservation, and destruction.” 

By this expression those who see the Vedas which 
describe Vishnu, Brahma, etc., alone, do not obtain the real 
knowledge about Vishnu, etc., though they are devoted to 
them, because only those who see the Vedas in connec¬ 
tion with Devi, are marked out by superior excellence ; 
hence there is no use of worshipping other deities as it is 
opposed to the rule “ for a beggar to beg from a beggar 
when a non-beggar, a (reasonably) rich man is present ? ” 
This is explained in our S'ivasthava. “ O Paramas'iva, why 
should I a beggar beg from Vishnu, Brahma, Indra and 
other beggars, who possess dominion given by you, saying 
‘do thou give to me.’ ’ Even an ignorant man who already 
enjoys the result of the twelve days’ sacrifice only desires 
the result of the Jyotishfoma (a superior sacrifice) and not 
the result of the twelve-day’s sacrifice.” (69) 

298. Narayani. 

Narayana, Vishnu or S'iva. The explanation of the 
word Nilrayana is given in Manu Smr. (I, 10) : “ The water 
is called Narah, because it emanated from Nara (Brahman) ; 
that is his first abode (ayana), hence he is named Narayana.” 
The Br. Vaivarta Pr. also, “ Because his abode is among 
men, hence he is called Narayana.” The De. Bhag. Pr., 
“ Because Nara means leading, hence, supreme self is 
called Nara.” The Bharata, “The wise knows that the 
Tatvas emanated from Nara (Brahman) and form his abode, 
hence he is called Narayana.” Here Narayana is Parama- 
s'iya, because concerning the fourth state, the Kaslkhanrfa 
says, “ He is the Husband of Lakshml and also of Parvatl.” 
Or this saying ‘ the husband of Lakshml ’ may indicate 
non-separation between Lakshml and Devi. Or, the sister 
of Vishnu is called Narayani. For there is a saying, 
“ Adoration to S’iva, the husband of Narayani.” Or, 
because there is no difference between Gaurl and Narayana. 



LALll'A S AH ASEAN AM A 


i55 

In the Ktkrma Pr. Siva says, “ I, the supreme. Lord, have 
divided myself into two forms, one is NSrayana, the other 
is Gaurl, the mother of the universe. So my supreme 
nature, is known to neither the Devas, nor to the Rishis, 
because I am one, I am Devi and Vishnu.” The Devi Pr. 
says, “ Because she has her abode in the water, not in air, 
or she has her seat in the ocean, hence she is called 
Narilyanl, the creator of Kara (men) and women.” 

According to the Padma Pr. Narayani is the name of 
the goddess worshipped in the sacred place SupSrs'va. 

299. In the form of sound, (Niidarllpa.j 

There are eight notes (varnas) above the bindu of the 
syllable Hrim, etc., such as, Ardhchandra, Rodhini, Nada, 
Nadiinta, S'akti, VySpika Samana, and UnmanI which are 
subtle, more subtle, and most subtle of these the third 
is Nada. It’s nature is described in the Mahasvachchanda 
Tantra. “ Nada, which resembles the filament of the lotus, 
shining like crores of suns, surrounded by innumerable 
cities, is above Rodhini (the 2nd) of above mentioned . . . 
The supreme Devi, seated on-the lap of that (Nada), 
leading upward, should be contemplated.” 

Or, Nada simply sound. 

300. Transcending name and form. (NamarOpa- 
vivarjita.) 

There are five forms of the universe which appear 
inextri^bly interwined in the knot of spirit and matter. 
These are as analysed by great men as “ existcncfe, know¬ 
ledge, bliss, name and form. The first three belong to 
Brahman, and the other two belong to the -world.” As the 
latter two, name and form are illusory, she transcends them. 

The meaning is that in reality there is no union 
between being and non-being. The Chcha. Up. (VIII, 14,1) 
says, “Ether (Brahman) separates name and form, between 
them is Brahman.” That which remains, when these two 

' A-U-M. in the syllable Ora and H-r-im in the Hrim, etc., and 
altogether make eleven in number. 



156 


LALlTA SAHA8KANAMA 


are eliminated by the ether which is the energy of 
consciousness, (Chit S'aktiJ is Brahman. 

Thus in the SaubhagyabhAskara composed by Bfaftsura- 
nanda, ends the fourth Kaia called Marlchi, with the third 
hundred of the names. 


THE FOURTH HUNDRED 

301. The syllable Hrlm. (HrlmkSrl.) 

Or, Hrlm , shame and Kdrl, doer. The meaning of 
Hrim is given in the Svatantra Tantra by a Vyakulakshara 1 
verse “The Vyoma (Ha) indicates the manifestation, Vahni 
( Tta) involution, I protection, and the dot (w) controlling 
the three.” The meaning is Hrlm corresponding to crea¬ 
tion, preservation and destruction (with the 4th) ; 
Karl doer. 

Or, Hrlmkarn, the Bhuvanes'varibija. 

302. Possessor of Hrlm. (Hrlmatl.) 

Hi l, shame. The S'ruti says, “ shame, mind, satisfac¬ 
tion, desire, nourishment.” 

15th verse divides 38 names. 

303. Abiding in the heart. (HridyS.) 

That is in the heart of ascetics. Or, Hridya, 
delightful. 

304. She has nothing to regret nor to accept. (Heyopa- 
deyavarjita.) 

Because the scriptures, which describe injunction and 
prohibition are confined to the ignorant ones. (70) 

305. Worshipped by RAjaraja. (RajarajarchitA.) 

Raja raja, Mann and Kubera; or, the Vidya of 

Kubera and others (refer No. 238). The Durvasa (in his 

> A most secret meaning of certain mantras was given out in a 
perplexing verse, with a key also is another verse iu the same way, 
in order that it may not be understood by the uninitiated. Such 
verses are called Vyakulakshara verse. 



LAL1TA SAHASRaNAJIA 


15 ? 


Lali-Stha.) when he describes the space between the four¬ 
teenth and the fifteenth walls, says, " I meditate upon 
Kubera, the head of a wealthy family, in the Eastern part 
of that place (of Vayu), and upon the other Yakshas, who 
depend upon, the feet of Mother, such as Manibhadra 
and others,” 

306. Queen. (Rajni.) y-“ 

Because she is the queen of Rajarajes'vara (S'iia)^,-,,,, 

307. The beautiful one. (Ramya.) I ^jg 

308. With eyes like those of a deer. (RajI v J U' ch 

Retjlva, according to the Vis'va means, “deer, fish, 

lotus, a dependent of a king.”- In the latter sense she looks 
favourably on those who depend on the king’s bounty. 

309. Delighting. (Ranjani.) 

Her devotees. Or, Ranjani, dyeing. By her presence, 
the rosy-tinted Devi colours the pure Paramas'iva as the 
red flower colours the crystal. 

310. Gladdener. (Ramani.) 

Of her devotees. The S'ruti (Chcha. Up. VIII, 12-3), 

“ Laughing, playing and rejoicing.” 

311. She who is to be tasted. (Rasya.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Up. II, 6-1) “ He is alone the essence.” 

312. Having a girdle of tinckling bells. (Ranat 

kinkiui mekhala.) (71) 

313 Rama. 

1% the form of Lakshmi. The So. Sam. (IV, 47, 66), 

“ She appears like a dancer in the form of Lakshmi, 
speech (Sarasvati), etc.” 

314. Having a face like the full moon. (Rakendu- 
vadana.) 


315. In the form of Rati. (RatirOpa.) 

The wife of Kama. 

Or, Rama (313) indicates 1, rdkendavadana (314) 
an US'vara. Thus the KamakalA Mantra is indicated here. 

316. Beloved of Rati. (Ratipriya.) 

317. Protector. (Rakshakari,) 



LALltfA SAHASRA&AMA 


158 


Or, Raksha, the holy ashes ; that is the protector 
and destroyer. 

318. Slayer of R&kshasas. (Rakshasaghni.) 

319. Rama. (Woman.) 

Or, Yogins delight in her {Rama to delight). The 
Linga Pr. says, “ All men are S'ankara, all women, Devi. 
The names which denote masculine gender are said, to be 
.of Siva, and those which-denote the feminine are the mani¬ 
festations of Devi. Thus women and men are the mani¬ 
festations of Devi and S'iva.’' The Yishnu Pr. also says, 
“ The divine Hari lives in the form of a man among Devas, 
animals, men, etc., and in t-hp form of women, O Maitreya, 
Lakshmi (lives), and there is none higher than these 
(two).” The Brah. Vaivarta Pr. also says, “ Whatever in 
the three worlds appear in female form all'that, 0 Devi, is 
thy form ; thus is declared in the scriptures.” Hence the 
Br. Parasara Smr. says, “ As women are pleased or 
displeased, so the Gods also are pleased or displeased. If 
they are pleased the family increase ; if they are displeased 
the family is spoilt.” 

320. Devoted to her husband. (Ramanalampafs). 

As she is the collective form of women, She makes 

each woman devoted to her husband. 

Or, Ramana, enjoyment, play ; lampata, devoted. (72) 

321. To be desired. (Karnya.) 

Those who desire liberation desire to obtain .Her by 
knowledge. 

Or, KUrnySt is the deity of the twelfth night of the 
dark fortnight. 

. 322. In the form of Kamakala. (Kamakalarftpa.) 

There are three bindus and the Hardakala ; in these, 
the first bindn is called Kama and the last Kala. Accord¬ 
ing to the rule of Pratyahara, Kamakala, includes all four. 
The real nature of that (Kamakala) is set forth in the 
Kamakalavilasa, from the verse beginning, “ The Paras'akti 
is in the form of the sprout, expanded out of the union of 




LALITA S AH ASHA N AM A 


159 


Siva and Sakti,” till the verse “Kama (means) desirable¬ 
ness and the Kala the same. The two bindus (in the 
middle) represent the sun and the moon.” 

Or, Kama both Siva and Devi, and Kala manifestation. 
This is explained in the Tripurasiddhanta : “ 0 Parvatl, 
Kala is the manifestation of Kfimes'vara and Kames'varl, 
hence she is known as Kamakala.” 

Or, she is the manifestation (Kala) of desire (Kama). 
The Kalika Pr. explains Devi alone is indicated by the word 
Kama. “ Devi is called Kama because she came to the 
secret place in the blue peak of the great mountain 
(Kailasa) along with me for the sake of desire (Kama) ; 
thus Devi is called Kama. As she is also fulfilling desire, 
desiring, desirable, beautiful, restoring the body of Kama, 
(manmatha) and destroying the body of Kama, hence she 
is called Kama.” 

323. Fond of Kadamba flowers. (Kadambakusuma- 
priya.) 

324. Beneficent. (KalySnl.) 

Or, according to the Padma Pr. in the Malaya Mountain 
she is worshipped as Kalyanl. 

Or, Zulya, good words, ana, to utter. 

325. Root of the world. (Jagatlkanda.) 

According to the Yadava, Kanda means filling, root of 

plants, cloud.” 

326. Ocean of the waters of compassion. (Karuna- 

rasasagara.) (73) 

327. Possessing sciences. (Kalavatl.) 

The sciences are sixty-four. 

328. Her ordinary conversation is science. (Kalalapa.) 

According to the Amara (verse 86), Kala means sweetly 

soundlng-fila^x/. speech. 

Or, Ka, Brahman : lala, saliva ; apu, attainment. The 
attainment of the Brahman becomes, through her 1 grace) 
as natural as the flows of saliva. 

329. Beautiful. (Kanta.) 



160 


LA LIT A SABASRANAMA 


Or, Ka, Brahman, nnta, final. Brahman (uncondi¬ 
tioned) is her final form. 

Or, she is the deity (called Kanta) of the eleventh 
night of the dark fortnight, 

330. Fond of mead. (KAdambaripriya.) 

The S'ruti (Tripura Up.) says, “Mead, fish, flesh, 
cooked serials offered in the triangle on behalf of the great 
Devata, the lucky devotee, recovering his self, attains 
perfection.” 1 

J^31. Granting boons. (Varada.) 

To Brahma, Vishnu and other devotees. This is said 
by Nfirada in the Matsya aijd Padma Prs. “ What I told 
you of this (Devi) about (her) ever uplifted hand ; for this 
uplifted hand of Devi ever confers boons. She will become 
the giver of boons to all Devas, Daityas and ascetics.” As 
in the world the hand is the instrument of giving, here the 
hand (of Devi) is said to confer boons. In reality, the 
expression means simply to fulfil the desire of the gods ; 
not having the emblem of granting boons. Acharya says 
(Sau La. S'lo. 4) : “ With the exception of yourself, all the 
bands of deities by their hands confer (respectively) gift 
and protection. Thou alone doth not do this.” The De. 
Bhag. Pr. also : “ She fulfils the desires of the Devas who 
seek boons. From the root vri to choose, she is called 
Varada, conferrer of boons, />., giver of the thing chosen.” 
In the Varaha Pr. also in the chapter on the VritrRsura- 
vadha, “ This Devi is always -to be worshipped, by 
concentration on the ninth day ; she will certainly become 
the giver of boons to all worlds.” 

. .332. Beautiful eyed. (Vamanayana). 

Or, Vama, fair and nayand lit. eyes, *.<?., proofs. 


1 Bashkararaya commenting on this Upauishad says this 
Upanishad gives injunction to those who are allowed to take mead, 
fish, etc., that they should take them first by dedicating them to 
God and minimise the habit by gradation. The same idea is 
expressed in the Manu Smr. V, 56, Vi. Bhag. Pr. XI, 5-11. 



LALITA SAHASltANAMA 


161 


Or, vama, the left (path), naya to lead. Or, vama, 
the fruit of inaction, because in the S'ruti (Chcha. Up., IV, 
15, 2 and 3) where the word vCtma occurs, it is thus 
explained. 

333. Perturbed by the intoxicating liquor. (Varunl- 
madavihvala.) 

Vdrunlmat, belonging to the regions of Yaruna, i.e., 
Adis'esha, the thousand hooded snake, because he dwells in 
that region ; avihvala not perturbed or fatigued, i.e., by 
Her grace Adis'esha is not fatigued, in supporting the 
universe. The Vishnu Pr. says, “ In the Varuna regions 
he (Adis'esha) worships (Devi) with his own glorious 
body.” 

VHr uni : the juice extracted from dates, called 
VHr uni, because the god Varuna is fond of it. The 
■expression means forgetting external objects and simply 
enjoying (lit. chewing) Svatmananda. 

Or, Vdrunlmat, those who conquered the VHrunlnHdl, 
and became firm {Avihvala). The Yoga S'astra says, 
“VaruninadI is that which is above and below, going 
everywhere, Pfishan is the deity of the quarters, and Vayu 
is the deity of this varuni tnadl).” (74) 

334. Transcending the Universe. (Vis'vadhika.) 

Vivva, the categories from earth to S'iva. The S'ruti 

says, “ Rndra, the great seer, transcends the universe.” 

335. To be known through the Vedas. (Vedavedya.) 

Vedas are Rig, Yajus, Saman, and Atharvana. The 

S'ruti (Kaivalya Up., II, 3), “I alone am to be known 
from all the Vedas.” The Smriti (Bh. Gita, 15, 15), also 
repeats the same. Or, there are four gates to the Chinta- 
mani palace (vide name 57) ; these are the four Vedas ; as 
the deity cannot be seen unless the gates are entered, 
hence it is said she is to be known, through the Vedas 
alone. The Sruti (Tai. Br.), “The great quarter, the 
east is said to be of the Rigs ; the endless southern 
quarter, they say, is that of the Yajus ; the. west of the 
21* 



162 


XALITA SAHAHRANAilA 


Adharva ; and the great northern quarter is that of 
Saman.” The meaning is that Devi should be known 
through the four goddesses, who are the deities of the 
four Vedas, viz., S'uddhavidya and others, Saubhagya and 
others, LopSmudra and others, and Turlyamba and others, 
who are the deities of Rig, Yajus, Adharva and Saman 
respectively. 

336. Residing in the Vindhya mountain. (Vindhya- 
chalanivasini.) 

The Padma Pr. in the chapter enumerating the sacred 
places says, “ Sita is in the TrikQ/a (mountain) and 
Vindhyadhivasini in the Vindya (mountain).” The 
Pancharatra in the Lakshmi Tr. says, “In the Vaivasvata 
Manvantara, two Daityas, S'umbha and Nis'umbha over¬ 
elated by their boons, will do injury to the devas. Born 
in the Nandagopa’s family, in the womb of Yas'oda, I 
under the name Nanda, residing in the Vindhya Mountain, 
shall destroy these two.” The same story is repeated in 
Mark. Pr. 

337. Supporter. (Vidhatri.) 

Nourisher of the universe. The Devi Pr. says, 
“ Dhatrl is known as the mother, because she bears.” 

Or, the wife of Brahma (Vidhata). Or, Vi, much, 
dhatri, myrabolam, because she is fond of myrabolams. 

338. Mother of the Vedas. (Vedajanani.) 

The Sfruti (Mun. Up., 1,1, 5) says, “ The Vedas are the 
breath of this great Being.” (PurushasOkta) also says, 
“ Rigs and Samans came out (from Him).” The Devi Pr.-, 
“Because, there arose from the Kundalini, which is 
triangular in form, the vowels and consonants ; hence she 
is the mother of the Vedas.” 

339. Maya of Vishnu. (Vishnumaya.) 

Vishnu, all-pervading, unlimited by place, time, etc. 
The M&y&, conditions or limits Vishnu. 

Or, the M&ya, illusion belonging to Vishnu. The 
Bh. Gita (7—14) says, “ This my divine illusion, consisting 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


163 


of Gunas is very difficult to transcend.” The Kalika Pr. 
also, Vishnum&yCb is that which differentiates, everything, 
into manifested and unmanifested according to the Tamas, 
Rajas and Satva qualities. 

340. Playful. (Vilasinl.) 

Vilam that power of projection (Vikshepas'akti) which 
she possesses. 

Vilam may mean a special power called Pllhas'akti. 

Or, Bila, (as there is no difference between the 
Syllable V. and B.), the Bralimarandhra (in Sahasrara) as 
to reside. This is explained in the Svachchanda Tr., 
“ There one should know the cavity of Brahman 
(Bralimarandhra), surrounded by millions of Rudras . . . 
This is another S'akti called Brahmaril, seated on the lap 
of Brahman, obstructing the door of the path of 
Salvation.” (75) 

16th verse divides 38 names. 

341. Her body is matter (Kshettra *). (Kshetra- 
svarftpa.) 

Kshetra, Kamaritpa and other abodes, or thirty-six 
categories from earth to S'iva, these are her body. The 
Linga Pr. says, “ Devi, the wife of the destroyer of the 
three cities (*.«., S'iva) becomes Kshetra (matters). The 
divine and eternal lord, the death of death is the knower 
of the bodies.” 

342. The wife of the ruler of the matter. (Kshetres'I.) 

343. The protector of the matter and of the knower 
of the matter. (KshetrakshetrajnapiUini.) 

Kshetrajna, is the Jlva. The Vishnu Smr. says. 
“ This body 0 Earth, is called Kshetra •, one who knows 
this is called Kshetrajna. 0 fair one, know me as the 
Kshetrajna in all bodies.” In the Bli. Gita Krishna 
teaches the same thing to Arjuna (13, 1 and 2). The 
Linga Pr., “The wise call the twenty-four categories 
Kshetra, and the enjoyer thereof the Kshetraj aa." But 
1 Kshetra lit. field that which is known by the soul, i.c., matter. 



164 


jALITA sahasranama 


the Yayu Pr. says, “ The unmanifested (avyakta) is called 
Kshetra, Brahman, Kshetrajna.” The Brahma Pr., 
“ Kshetras are the bodies, the soul united -with them 
(YogAtman) ; the enjoyer, according to his pleasure is the 
Kshetrajna.” ■ The Mann Smr. (12, 12 to 15), “ He who is 
the cause of action of the (embodied) souls they call him 
the Kshetrajna. Him, who performs actions, the wise 
name BhGtAtman (the self consisting of elements). 
Another internal self that is generated with all bodied, is 
called Jiva, through which (he, the Kshetrajna) feels all, 
pleasure and pain in the bodies. These two, the great 
one, and the Kshetrajna, who are closely united with the 
elements, pervade him who resides in (all) beings great 
and small. From his body innumerable bodies arise 
which constantly impel the multiform creatures to- 
action.” 

344. Free from decay and growth. (Kshayavriddhi 
vinirmuktA.) 

Growth and decay belong to Kshetra and changing. 
Though She controls them, she is free from them. The 
Bh. Gita (2, 23), “ Weapons do not cut, etc.” 

Or, she is free from these two which are the result of 
actions. The S'ruti (Br. Up., IV, 4, 22) says, “ This is the 
eternal glory of the knower of Brahman. He neither 
increases by action nor becomes less.” “ Neither be¬ 
comes more by good actions nor less by bad ones.” 

345. Worshipped KshetrapAla. (KshetrapAlasamar. 
chita.) 

Kali was created by Sdva to slay the Daitya DAruka. 
Even after killing him the fire of her wrath was not 
appeased. Seeing the confusion of the world, S'iva in 
order to dispel her anger assumed the form of a crying 
infant. She suckled the child who drank up the fire of her 
anger with the milk. This child which is that incarnation 
of S'iva, is called KshetrapAla. This story occurs in the 
Linga and other Prs. The literal meaning is Kshetra is the 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


165 

precinct of the sacrificial ceremony, and P&la, the protector. 

(76) 

346. Ever victorious. (Vijaya.) 

Or, VijayO,, knowledge itself. 

According to the Devi Pr. she is the deity of Kashmira 
which is one of the sixty-eight Sacred places. As regards 
the meaning of Vijaya, the same book says : “ After 
conquering the very powerful king of the Daityas named 
Padma, she is known in the three worlds by the epithet 
Vijaya (ever victorious) and unconquerable (Aparajita).” 

Or, Vijaya is the name of a building, mentioned in 
the Vis'vakarma S'astra. 

• According to the Chinthamani, Vijaya is an auspicious 
hour; “In the month As'vina, in the tenth day of the 
bright fortnight, when the stars appear, that time is known 
as Vijaya, giving success to all undertakings.” In the 
Batnakos'a, we read, “ The time, just after the twilight 
(sandhya) when the stars begin to shine, is called Vijaya, 
favourable to all undertakings. The eleventh Muhttrtha 
(eight hours and forty-eight minutes after midday) is 
named Vijaya. A journey should be begun at that time 
by all who desire success.” 

347. Unsullied. (Vimala.) 

Mala (impurity) belongs to Avidya. 

According to the Padma Pr. Vimala is the deity of the 
sacred place, Pnrushottama. 

Or, Vimala is a kind of house. The Vis'vakarma 
S'astra enumerates the following houses. “ Dhruva, Dlianya, 
Jaya, Kanta, Vipula, Vijaya Sumukha, Vimala, Nan da, 
Nidhana and Manorama.” 

348. Adorable. (Vandya.) 

349. Fond of the worshippers. (Vandarujanavatsala.) 

350. The speaker of the word. (Vagvadinl.) 

Or, Vayvadini is a certain deity so called. The Tripura 
Siddhanta says: “As she always abides in the form of 
speech on the tongue of all her devotees, she is known in 




166 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the world as VSgvadinl.” The Laghastava also (Sdo. 15) 
says, “Since thou art the origin of all words, thou art 
known in the world as Vagvlkdinl.” 

351. Having beautiful hair. (VSmakesl.) 

Or, VCtmaka , men, and tm , lord, i.e., Siva, his wife is 
Vamakesl. According to the Devi Pr. Vamakes'a is the 
deity of Jada, one of the sixty-eight sacred places, and his 
wife is Vamakesl. 

Or, Vamakes'a is one (of the twenty-eight) Tantras 
promulgated by Siva ; as she is treated of in that work, 
she is Vamakesl. 

352. Residing in the circle of fire. (Vahnimandala- 
vasini.) 

Vahnimandala , is that in the Mhladhara, or that in 
the supreme ether (Paramakas'a). 

Or, Vaiini means three, hence three mandalas, thus 
she resides in the three circles of the moon, the sun and 
the fire. 1 (77) 

353. The kalpa creeper of the devotees. (Bhakti- 
matkalpalatika.) 

The kalpa creeper yields everything desired. 

Or, kalpa means imperfect, i.e., she makes perfect (lit. 
lata, spread over) her imperfect devotees. 

Or, Lata, musk, she sheds fragrance on her devotees. 
According to Rabhasa, “ Lata, means heart-pea, musk, 
jasamine and pani-grass.” The meaning is that she glad¬ 
dens her imperfect (lit. half) devotees °by the gift of all 
devotion. This is mentioned in the S'aktirahas'ya : “ He 
who worships Bhavani irregularly or with imperfect devo¬ 
tion, in the next birth becomes possessed of regular and 
perfect devotion.” 

354. Releasing the ignorant from bondage. (Pas'upas'a- 
vimochini.) 


1 The three circles are the moon, in the sahasr&ra, the sun, in the 
anahata, and the fire in the mOladhara. This may mean also the 
three parts of PanchadasI mantra. 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


167 


Pasfus (lit. cattle) are those who are devoid of the 
conviction of non-separation (abhedajnana). The Br. Up. 
(1, 4, 10) says, “ Now, he who worships another deity, 
thinking the deity is one and himself another individual, 
he does not know. He is like a Pas'll.” Here the word 
Yonyam {yah, one and anyam, another deity) means the 
triangular (S'ri) chakra. Because the S'ruti (Tai.) says, 
“ In that golden three-petalled bud three (syllabled 
mantra, i.e., of Devi) is established.” Hence the pa/rm are 
those who are devoid of wisdom. 

Pa-; a (bondage) : pa, thirst. Am, hunger. This 
(hunger and thirst) belongs only to the ignorant, and she 
TU',•completely mochini, releases. The ignorants are called 
Pas'us because they possess the desire of eating and chink¬ 
ing only. The S'ruti says, “ Now the other pas'us understand 
only hunger and thirst; they do not speak of the known 
(Brahman) ; they do not see the known, they do not know 
the future, nor this nor the other world.” 

Or, Pant, (avyaya indeclinable) means completely, as 
in the S'ruti “ Samyagarthe, etc.,” the word Pas'u is thus 
explained, Pam the noose of Varuna, from which she frees 
her devotees. 

Pam., dice, vi, much, moclvini, throwing. The 
meaning is that in gambling with S'iva, while throwing the 
dice on the board, she conquered him. 

Pant-pa, the protector (pa) of pas'us, i.e., the supreme. 
S'iva ; am, those who desire to obtain S'iva, such ones she 
emancipates (mochint), entirely {vi). 

Pants, all things from Brahma, to a tree, because they 
have the quality of palm {i.e., the desire of eating and 
drinking) ; Pam avidya because it is the means of bondage. 
The Saura Sam. explaining the word, avidya says, “ It is 
the cause of all bondage.” 

Or, Pams, the modifications (seven) or the categories 
(sixteen) of it (avidya) ; Vimochini she releases them by 
(means of) devotion to S'iva. The Linga Pr. : “ From 



LALXTA SAHA9RANAMA 


Brahma to trees are the Pams of the trident-bearer, the 
god of gods, because they all have the nature of beasts 
(.Pas'us).” The twenty-four categories, (including) illusion 
(Maya) action (Karma) and the qualities (gunas), and the 
objects also are called Pas'uS because they bind the Jivas. 
Bound by these, all embodied souls are emancipated by 
devotions to S'iva alone.” 

There are fivefold afflictions, viz., nescience, egoism, 
desire, anger, ardent attachment (to life). Nescience is 
the absence of discrimination between the Self and the 
non-self. Egoism is the assumption that body, etc., which 
are not Self are Self. Desire is the craving after flowers, 
scents, etc., which are the means of bodily enjoyment. 
Anger is aversion to whatever obstructs the attainment of 
them. Ardent attachment is not renouncing a thing even 
though, one knows it is not beneficial. The same is ex¬ 
plained in the Yoga Stltra, (III, 3 to 9). But the De. Bh3g. 
Pr. says, “ (1) non-discrimination is darkness (Tamas) ; (2) 
bewilderment of mind is confusion (Moha) ; (3) desire of 
worldly pleasures is great confusion (Mah-3 moha) ; (4) 
death is deep indignation (Andhatamisra) ; and (5) anger 
is called indignation (Tamisra). Thus nescience which 
sprung from the great Atman (Brahman) is fivefold.” 
But here words Tamas, etc., are only different names for 
the five afflictions mentioned above. Death here corres¬ 
ponds to ardent attachment (of yoga s’tttra division). This 
is explained in the Linga Pr. : “ 0 best of men, the wise 
say that nescience, egoism, desire, hatred and ardent 
attachment, these five are the Pas'as. The learned say, the 
afflictions are five, namely, darkness, confusion, great 
confusion, deep indignation and indignation. Nescience, 
they say is darkness ; egoism is confusion ; desire is great 
confusion, attachment (to life) is deep indignation and 
hatred is indignation.” The divisions of these five 
afflictions are given in the same work : “ There are eight 
kinds of darkness, eight of confusion, ten of great 





LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


169 


confusion, eighteen of deep indignation and eight of 
indignation.” These are in all fifty-two. Some say that 
indignation has ten more, making sixty-two in all. These 
(sixty-two) afflictions differ, according to the three kinds 
of men (Pas'us), viz., the worldly men, the ascetics (yogin) 
and the knowers of truth (Tatvajna). The De. Bhag. Pr. 
says, “ In the knowers of truth these afflictions sleep, in 
tho yogins, they are burned up, in those attached to worldly 
objects they arise unimpeded.” 

The Kularnava says, “ The Piis’as are eight, viz., pity, 
doubt, fear, shame, disgust, family, custom and caste.” The 
above enumerations of the afflictions are not contradictory, 
the larger are simply elaborators of the smaller enumera¬ 
tions. These larger divisions are not here explained in 
detail for fear of prolixity. 

Thus in the text the word Pa’s'a according to the rule 
(of Vararuchi’s system) though it indicates the number 
fifty-one, (6 ’’a five and pa, one) is here taken, according to 
the rule of approximity as fifty-two. Thus we see in the 
(first) verse Nityttnanda vapuh, etc., of the Saradatilaka 
when the word for fifty occurs, explained as fifty-two by 
Harsha Dikshlta and others. Therefore Pam means fifty- 
two ; P&sas, afflictions, vimochini, remover. The S'iva 
Rahas’ya says : “ He alone who binds the Pas'us by the five 
afflictions and fifty-two Pams, is able, being worshipped 
with much devotion, to free them.” So much for Pauranic 
interpretation. 

Or, atoms (auu), difference (Bheda), and action (Karma), 
are the three (Pams). Of these ignorance is ana ; this is of 
two kinds ; the one is the absence of the eongnition of the 
nature of the Self which is Intelligence itself ; the second 
is the (erroneous) cognition of the self in body, etc. These 
two are together called the impurity of aim (Anava 
Mala). 

Amu is so called because it limits the unlimited Self. 
This is said in the Saura Sam.: “ It is called ai:u because 
22* 



170 


I.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


it causes the limitation of the Self ; as it is impure it is 
called impurity (Mala).” 

Bheda means division of the one self into many. Of 
this, the root cause is called Mitya, that is the sixth 
affliction to be added (to the five). This is one (group). 
The group of the categories, the products of these (six} 
from the seventh to thirty-sixth, is another one. These two 
together are called the impurity of illusion (Maya Mala). 

Karnwi (actions) means the product of ordained or 
prohibited actions, capable of giving bodies, and invisible 
(adrishta). This is of two kinds, good and bad ; together 
these are called the impurity of action (Karma Mala). 

Thus in these three, the latter have the qualities ef the 
former. These are all explained in the Pratyabhijna 
S'astra : “ The loss of the perception of independence, and 
mot understanding the independence, thus there are two 
kinds of impurities belonging to an u. Because this takes 
away one’s own nature. This impurity of illusion is the 
idea of the duality of the Self which gives birth and 
enjoyment, The impurity of action is leading one to the 
perception of necessary actions. Thus the three (Pas'as) 
(exist) by the power of Maya only.” 

This is more clearly explained in the S'aiva Sntra 
Yartika : “If, of the waking soul (Vis'va) as above 
described, intelligence is the body, how is it connected with 
bondage ? To remove this doubt, the great Is'vara replies 
with the S'fltras, treating of the contact and non-contact 
with the Pas'as ” (S'tttra, I, 2). “ Ignorance (is) the bondage.” 
(Yartika) : “The first ignorance is cognition in the non¬ 
self of the Self, which is the source of intelligence ; the 
second is thinking of body, etc., which are not-self, as 
Self. These two belong to awu. Mala, the impurity, the 
man attributes to himself, bringing about bondage by his 
own will. But the anu impurity is not the sole bond.” 
(Shtra, I, 3) : “ Birth (yognih) is the group (vargra). 
Kala (Part) is the body. Yoni means difference (Bheda), 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


171 


the cause of extension, i.e., Maya. Varga the group of 
the categories, sprung from that (Maya), from time to 
earth this is the impurity of Maya, which is (the cause) 
of the perception of duality. 

Kal& (lit. with part, i.e., embodied souls) separates 
men after entering into the body, limited, and in the 
nature of good, and bad. Body is that which is called the 
impurity of action. In these (last) two the first impurity 
is included. 

Thus there are three bonds, the second includes the 
first, the third the other two. . The word pam indicates, 
the three kinds of Jlvas resulting from the three bonds. 
Though, by the combinations of all possible ways with 
the three bonds, there are Seven kinds of Jivas, yet in 
reality, as the second bond includes the first and the 
third the other two, there are only three kinds. These 
palus in the Nityahridaya are termed respectively, pure, 
mixed, and impure (for Ann Bheda, and Karma Malas). 
But in the Svachchanda Tr. and other works they are 
called respectively VijnSnakevala (mere discrimination), 
Pralayakala (lit. until the dissolution with parts temporari¬ 
ly) and Sakala (with parts always). So it is described (in, 
the above books), “ There are three kinds of Pas'us : among: 
these some are Sakalas, some are called Pralayakalas, 0,. 
MahesVarl, the remaining ones are the Vijmlnakevalas- 
Hear their respective natures.” <g’hose bound by the three 
Pas'as are called Sakalas. It is said, “ Covered with 
impurity from the beginning, covered with illusion and 
action, though pure (in himself), regarding the body as S'iva 
(Self), ever tainted with separateness, weak, continually 
active, enjoying the fruits of his own actions, ever 
enamoured •with pleasure, this is the Sakala Pas'u.” In 
the above quotation impurity, illusion, mean respectively 
Atiu and Bheda. The Sakala Pas'us are of tw'o kinds, one 
who has burned his impurities, and the other whose 
imparities are unburned; of those, who have burned the 



172 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


three impurities (Anu, Bheda and Karma) are the one 
hundred and eighteen sages (Siddhas) ; they, by power of 
the full grace of S'iva obtained the dominion over the 
mantras. Of these the hundred are called Rudras, eight, 
S'atamandalins, eight Krodhabhattaraka ®(Durv&sa) and 
others,'' one is Vlres'vara and the last is Srikanfha. The 
others also, S'iva himself in the form of a teacher, blesses. 

Those who have not burned the three impurities, are 
appointed to different births in order to burn their 
impurities through fruition. That itself is a sign of 
graciousness to (them). For it is said, “When the 
impurities are not come to fruition, they can be the 
recipients of ordinary grace ; thus 0 Mahes'varl, the three 
kinds of Pasfm obtain mastery and dominion by the grace 
of S'iva alone . . . and he out of compassion appoints 
them to different births in order to burn (their 
impurities).” 

Those who are bound by the two Pams anu and 
action, are Pralayitkalas (temporarily bound) ; of these 
there are two divisions, those who have and those who 
have not burned their impurities ; among these the latter, 
by the power of action are born in superior (from a 
religious standpoint) positions. The former partaking of 
the grace of the Lord become the lords of the universe. 
This is said in the Svachchanda Sangraha. “ The mixed 
(class) who have right rations, are called Pralayakalas ; 
they have the body of eight cities (Puryash/aka) ; according 
to their different actions, 0 beloved one, they obtain many 
births : and having enjoyed the fruits of their own actions, 
when their actions are in equilibrium they become S'iva 
himself ; they, having completely burned the impurity of 
action, having retained something (of action) they 
become the lords of the world, ruling the Tatvas, Jala 
(water), etc.' These (lords) are of three kinds.” 

Those who are bound by the impurity of anu only are 
the VijnSnakevalas (those mere discriminators). For it is 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


173 


said “The Pas'u who is bound by one impurity (of anu) 
alone is called Vijnanakevala; 0 beloved one as he, 
completely burned the impurity (of anu) became the mere 
discriminator.” These also are of two kinds, i.o., one has 
and the othe? has not finished with sin. The former 
become the lords of knowledge (Vidyes'varas), the latter 
are the spirits of the seven crores of powerful mantras.- 
But these must not be considered inanimate (sound) ; they 
like ourselves possess Chaitanya. So the Mrigendra Sam. 
says, “ Then who has got rid of the beginningless impurity 
(of anu) becomes omnipotent, omniscient, Siva himself, 
and throws off the meshes of the net of anu, which before 
held him down.” The Agamikas also say, “ S'ambliu who 
blesses all, gives happiness and salvation to all those who 
are bound by anu and persevere in their work (i.e., burn¬ 
ing impurity) The mantras are called anu because they 
belong to the soul, who has not burned impurity. Thus 
there are endless divisions of the six kinds of Pas'us 
according to their progress in burning the impurities. As 
the births and dominion attained by these, according to 
their progress, are for the sake of burning the impuri¬ 
ties by fruition ; they are (intended as the) means of 
salvation. 

But if release is the work of S'iva, how does Devi 
become an agent ? Without possessing the power (S'akti) of 
release S'iva can do nothing ; therefore the agency of release 
should be acknowledged to belong to S'akti alone by (the 
rule) of agreement and continuity. This is attested to by 
great men : “ I adore with all my heart that S'akti which 
is Intelligence, primeval through whom S'iva is able to 
confer happiness and salvation on all Pas'us.” Moreover 
the agency is independence, because says Pilnini (1,4,54) 
“The agency is independence.” That belongs to S'akti so 
the S'akti Sfltra says : “The. independent intelligence (chit) 
is the cause of the establishment of the Universe.” But a 
S'aiva SOtra (1,1) says, “ Intelligence is the self (S'iva).” 



174 


lalita sahasranama 


As there is no expression . (in the above Shiva SQtra) of 
independence and from the force of the neuter gender (i.e., 
the word Chaitanya is neuter) Siva has not the quality of 
agency, etc. But S'akti and S'iva S'tttras of above {i.e.. 
Intelligence is Devi and Intelligence is S'iva) and the 
saying of the wise “ intelligence (chit) applies to Siva as 
well as to S'akti,” mean in such cases (that S'iva and 
Sakti) are inseparable (i.e., both are one and same). Such 
is the doctrine of the S'aiva schools. 

Thus Pams means those above discribed, P&sa, 
impurities vi, according to their deserts, Mcchinl releases. 

355. Destroyer of all heretics. fSamhritS s'eshapS- 
shanda). 

The Linga Pr. describes the nature of the heretics 
thus: “Observers of vows not enjoined in the Vedas and 
those who are excluded from the ceremonies enjoined by 
the S'ruti and Smritis are called heretics, they are not to be 
spoken with by the Twice-born. The Brahma Vaivarta 
Pr. also “ (1) Purnwas, (2) Nyaya, (3) Mim&msa, (4) 
Dharma S'astras, (5 to 10) the Angas (i.e., the supplements 
S'iksha to Jyotisha), (11 to 14) the Vedas (four) which 
are the source of knowledge, these fourteen are the seat of 
righteousness (Dharma sthSna).” Taking these (four¬ 
teen) “ These are the true, what is beyond these imagined 
by men is called heresy (Pashnantfa) ; this is created by 
the great confusion for the^wilderment of the Daityas.” 

If the reading is Pakhanda, it gives the same meaning. 
The explanation of the word is, “ Pa, means the meaning 
of the Vedas and Khan da cutting off.’* 

356. Inciting to right action. (Sadachara pravartika). 

■Because she destroys the wicked, and she incites to 

right action. The expression means : She gives the 
inclination to observe the precepts enjoined in the Karma 
KanrZa and the Advaita Brahman in the Jnanakanda, through 
the means laid down in the Purawas. It is said in the 
Kfirma Pr. by Dev! herself. “ The eighteen Puranas, O 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


175 


King, were promulgated by VySsa, by the command of 
Brahman ; in them righteousness (Dharma) is established. 
The other supplementary (upa) PurSwas were promulgated 
by his pupils. In every age (yuga) he, (Vyasa) theknower 
of the science of righteousness, is the promulgator of all 
(Puranas, etc.). S'iksha, Kalpa, Grammar, Nirukta, Chandas, 
and Jyotisha, and logic etc., (four) and the four Vedas, 
thus the fourteen (scriptures) are the sources of knowledge. 
The righteousness (Dharma), 0 best one, is not to be found 
elsewhere. Thus the supreme Dharma, which has come 
down from the grandsire, Maim, Vyasa and others, by my 
command, is established till the dissolution of the universe.” 

(78) 

357. She is the moonlight delighting those burned by 
the triple fire of misery. (Tapatrayagni samtapta samahla- 
dana chandrika.) 

The three miseries are, that belong to body, to 
elements, and to deities. Fire, Samsara, (The man free 
from it becomes) as the S'ruti (Br. Up., IV, 4-25) says, 
“ Without decay and immortal.” 

358. Ever young. (Tarunf.) 

359. Worshipped by ascetics. (Tapasaradhya.) 

Or, T&pa, Samsara the father of misery, Sara, essence, 
a, deep, dhya meditation, i.e., Devi is the essential object 
of meditation amidst the earthly misery. 

360. Slender waisted. Sfenumadhya.) 

Tanumadhya is the deity worshipped in the country 

of Kanchl; for it is said, “ May Devi, Tanumadhya, the 
wife of Bilves'vara residing on the bank of the Niva (river), 
protect me.” 

Tanumodya is the name of a certain metre. The Pingala 
Stttra, says, “ If there is one Tagana and yagana in each 
foot it is called Tanumadhya.” 

361. Remover of darkness. (Tamopaha.) 

Tamm, ignorance. The la's. Up. (9) says, “They 
who worship ignorance enter blind darkness.” The Brahma. 



176 


LAL1TA SAHASKANAMA 


Pr. also, “ The Aranyaka S'ruti (Tai. Ar.) blames all 
worship except that of Vidya.” (79) 

362. Intelligence. (Chith.) 

Chit is wisdom opposed to avidya. The S'akti S'fltra, 
“Chit is independent and the cause of the establishment 
of the Universe.” The Mahaviisishfha, “ She (Devi) is 
called chit , because she .is the life of those who desire 
life.” 

363. She is what is denoted by the term Tat. (Tatpada- 
lakshyartha.) 

Tat, the word which occurs in the transcendental 
phrases means the conditioned Brahman endowed with the 
work of creation, etc., of the Universe. The same word 
Tat also indicates, (indirectly, Lakshi/a) unconditioned 
Brahman, who is without attributes. The relation between 
the two Brahmans (unconditioned and conditioned) is the 
sameness (Tadatmya). * 

364. The one essence of intelligence. (Chidekarasa- 
rfipinl.) 

But even the unconditioned (Brahman) has the attri¬ 
butes of bliss, etc. (To answer this question) this name is 
‘ given, Bliss consciousness and other attributes ’ ; the 
expression means, that those attributes are inseparable 
from her. This is explained in the Panchapadika (of 
Padmapadacharya) : “Bliss, the perception of the objects 
and eternity are attribut(§8) which although inseparable 
from consciousness appear as different.” 

Or, the unconditioned Brahman is not the (real) nature 
of Is'vara (conditioned one), because both are different, 
hen,ce the relation (between the two) just described above 
fNo. 363) is not possible. To remove this doubt this name 
is introduced. Chidckarasarupim, i.e.. She is ever non- 
separated from the chit. The relation of these two is 
possible as the two are one and the same. Though the 
two appear as different (by attributes) yet at the same time 
they are one. 



177 


365. The totality of the bliss of Brahms, etc., is but a ~ 
minute portion of her own bliss. . (SvatmanandaiavlbhUta 
brahmSdySnancla santatih.) 

The bliss of Indra and others is but a drop' in the 
Ocean, in comparison •with the bliss of Devi. Brahma, etc .; 
Brahms, Vishnu, itudra, who possess the quality of crea¬ 
tion, preservation and .destruction. The S'ruti (Tai. Up., 
II, .3) says, “ Other beings live on a mere part of 
this bliss.” 

Again the same S'ruti, from man’s bliss more and 
more in the higher grades, describing, includes (among the 
bliss of Devas) the bliss of PrajSpati, also, as it is limited 
and «as it is less than the bliss of unconditioned Brahman, 
and consequently unfit for human aspiration, and estab¬ 
lishes that the bliss of Brahman (alone) is unlimited. The 
meaning is that the word Tat (363) indicates the uncondi¬ 
tioned Bralftian, in order to agree with the authorities 
(scriptures) which establish the meaning of them by (the 
rule) of beginning, etc. (Upakrama, etc.) as the knowledge 
as the means of Purusharthas. 

Lava according to the Visva means, particle and 
sport. (80) 

366. Para. 

Since the power of expression depends upon the 
correspondence of the words and their meanings, as the 
unconditioned Brahman also^£ included in the sound 
(S'abdabrahman) why then is Brahman indirectly 
(Lakshana) indicated (as the Vedantins say) by the words 
“ existence, etc.” ? Because the words which are the physi¬ 
cal forms of speech (Vaikhari) only express (identify) the 
physical form of Brahman (the Viral) and do not corres¬ 
pond to the pure (unconditioned) Brahman. Thus replying 
he divides speech (into four forms). 

The following should be noted. During Pralaya, when 
the actions (Karma) of beings about to bemanifested are not 
yet ripe, the Brahman, bound my Maya and by those actions 




178 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


(Karmabhinnainaya lit. Maya itself in the form of actions) 
is called Ghanibhflta (the congealed one). 

When, in course of time, the actions begin to ripen 
and the former state of unripeness disappears, that state is 
called Vichiktrsha (longing for action). At the moment of 
ripeness, when the modification of Maya appears, Brahman, 
endowed with Maya in the form of ripened actions, is 
called Avyakta (unmanifested). Hence creation is 
attributed in the Smritis to the Avyakta : “ O best of 
twice-born, from that is sprung the Avyakta with the three 
qualities.” That (Avyakta), as it is the sprouting root of 
the universe, is termed as the KSranabindu (the cause dot). 
The Prapanchasara says, “ That Intelligence, the congealed 
one, desirous of action, attains the state (of Karawa) 
bindu.” Prom this KAra/ia bindu proceeds in order the 
Karya bindu (effect dot). From the latter b^da (sound) ; 
thence the Bija ; thus the three came into being. These 
(three) are also called by the words (the supreme) subtle 
(Stikshama) and physical (Sthfila). In their nature they 
partake respectively of intelligence (chit), combined of 
intelligence and non-intelligence (chidachit), and of non- 
intelligence (achit). So the Rahasyagama says, “That 
Bindu (the cause dot) when in the course of time it 
sprouts, become® three. Its three divisions are gross, 
Subtle, and supreme. These are called, Bindu Nada and 
Bija.” These four, inclujlmg the Karana bindu, in their 
divine aspect (Adhidaivata) are Avyakta, IsVara, Hiranya- 
garbha, and Viraf, also the four S'aktis, vis ., S'anta, Varna, 
Jyeshta and Raudri, and also, Ambika, Ichcha, Jnana, and 
Kriya. In the elemental aspect (Adhibhflta) these are the 
four seats, vis., KAmarOpa, Pfirnagiri, Jalandhara, and 
Odhyana. So the NityAhridaya says. 

In the bodily aspects (Adhyatma) the KAra/iabindu, 
resides in the Mttladhara and is known by the words as 
S'akti Pinda (mono-syllabled mantra), Kundalini, etc. 
The Acharya (Laghustava, Bio. 2) says by the following 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


179 


•words about the Kundalini : “ There is a S'akti, called 
Kuncfalini having known her who is ever engaged in the 
work of the creation of the universe, a man never again 
enters his mother’s womb as a child U-e., he has no 
Samsara).” This is the Karauabindu in its non-differentiat- 
ed condition. When it sprouts in order to create the 
three, vis., Karyabindu, etc., then the unmanifested sound 
called S'abdabrahman (Brahman-word) arises in it. It is 
said also, “ From this differentiation of that (Karana) 
bindn comes the unmanifested sound ; that sound is- 
termed S'abdabrahman by those learned in sound.” 

This sound, since it is one with the Kilranabindu and 
is therefore all-pervading, yet first appears in the Mtila- 
dhara of persons by the power of air acted upon by the 
effort of manifestation. It is said, “ In the Mftladhara in the 
body the air first appears ; that air acted upon by the effort 
of a person*desiring to speak, produces the all-pervading 
S'abdabrahihan.” That S'abdabrahman which is in the 
Kftrana bindn, when it is manifested, remaining motionless 
(nishspanda) in its own place, is called Para Speech. 

The same (S'abdabrahman), produced by the same air 
proceeding as far as the navel, joined with the reasoning 
intellect, (Manas) possessing the nature of the manifested 
Karyabindu with simple motion (Sijgianyaspanda) is 
named Pas’yantl speech. 

Next the same S'abdabral^pan, produced by the same 
air proceeding as far as the heart, joined with the 
determining understanding (Buddhi), in the manifested 
Nfula, endowed with special motion (Vis'esliaspanda) is 
called Maddbyama speech. 

Next the same (S'abda brahman), produced by the 
same air, proceeding as far as the mouth, devoloped in the 
Throat, etc., in the form of articulation, capable of being 
heard by the ears of others’ possessing the nature of the 
manifested Blja, with the universal motion (Spash/atara) 
is called Vaikhari speech. It is explained by the Achftrya : 




180 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


“That (sound) which first arises in the Maladbara is 
called Para ; next the Pas'yantl; next when it goes as far 
as the heart and is joined to the understanding (Buddhi) 
it is called Maddhyama ; and the full manifestation is 
Vaikharl ; . . . Thus, articulated sound is produced by air.” 
The Nitya Tr. also says, “The Para form rises in the 
Mtliadhara produced by air ; the same (air) rising upwards, 
manifested in the Svadhish/hana, attains the Pas'yantl 
state. The same slowly rising upwards and manifested 
in the Anahata, united with the understanding is termed 
Maddhyama. Again rising upwards appearing in the 
Yis'udhi and comes out from the throat as Vaikharl.” 
Thus, though there are four kinds of speech gross minded 
men who do not understand the first-three, viz., Para, 
etc., think speech to be Vaikhari alone. The S’ruti says, 
“ Hence men think that alone to be speech which _is 
imperfect.” That is to say, imperfect by not possessing 
the first-three forms. Another S'ruti also '(Rig Veda 

I, 164, 45) : “ Four are the definite grades of the speech ; 

those Bi-ahmanas who are wise know them : three deposited, 
are in secret and motionless ; men speak the fourth grade 
of speech. ” " 

The Su. Sam. (IV, 4-23) also says, “ Apada the 
motionless (S'abftS) brahman) became pada (the four forms 
of speech) and pada may become apada. He who knows 
the distinction between @da and apada, he really sees, 
(*.e., himself becomes Brahman).” 

Thus by the S'rutis and Smritis it is concluded that 
the word Tat has four divisions (para, etc.). The charac¬ 
teristic, of the words (pada) according to Gautama, (S'tttra, 

II, 2-80) is, “ The pada is that which has a termination.” 
Panini also (S'tttra,“I, IV, 14) : “That which ends in Sup 
(nominal) and in Tip (verbal) is called Pada.” Again 
the Sup (termination) has four divisions. 

Even the word Tat in the para form only denotes 
the unmanifested form (Avyakta, the cause of Para, etc.) 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


181 


■which has the three qualities, and does not indicate the 
unconditioned Brahman which is above that (Avyakta) ; 
how can the word Tat in the Vaikharl form indicate 
Brahman ? It does not. But even if the word TadMmya 
(identity) has the power to denote (Brahman) yet the 
word Tat can only indicate it indirectly. 

Or, Para (highest) : She is called Para because she is 
the highest of the three (lower) speeches : The Tripura 
SiddhSnta explains the word Para by different ways, 
“ As she is pleased with Paranandan&tha (a guru) she is 
called Para. As she is celebrated in the work oalled 
Parananda, she is Para, and as she is the supreme source 
of gi'ace, she is Para. Thus Silmbhavi is called Para.” 

367. Inner consciousness. (Pratyakchitirftpa.1 

Pratyak, inwardly, one who approaches the Self, 

rupa, form, i.e., the unmanifested Brahman, as her form. 

368. Pas’yanti. 

She has another name, namely, Uttlrna (rising up). 
The Saubhiigya Sudhodaya says, “ As she sees all in 
herself, and as she rises Uttirna). above the path of action, 
hence this Mother is called Pa ?y anti, and Uttirna.” 

369. * Supreme deity. (Paradevatfi.) 

She is to be worshipped as the Supreme deity. 

370. MadhyamS. # 

Because she abides in the midst. It is said : “ She is 
neither like Pas'yantI, nor do# she proceed outwards like 
Yaikharl, with articulation fully developed ; but she is in 
the middle between these two v ” 

371. In the form of Vaikharl. (Vaikharlrflpa.) 

Vaikharl: Vi, much, Khara, hard, i.e., speech in its 

physical form. 

According to the Saublulgya Sudhodaya, Vai, certainly 
Kha, the cavity (of the ear) ra to go, or to enter. 

But according to the saying of the ..Yoga Sastras, 
“ She is called Vaikharl because she was produced by the 
Prana called Vikhara.” 



182 


I.AL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


872. The swan in the minds of the devotees. 
(BhaktamauasahamsikS.) 

[As the mythical swans live in the celestial lake called 
Manasa so she lives in the minds (Manana) of her 
devotees.] (81) 

373. The vital current of Kames'vara. (Kames'vara- 
prananarfl.) 

The Acharya (San. La. S'l. 28), “ When Siva drank 
the virulant poison, his days did not end owing, 0 mother, 
to the power of your ear ornaments.” 1 

j)74. Judge of actions. (Kritajna.) 

Krita good and bad (actions). 

“ The Sun, the moon, the god of death, time, and the 
five elements, these nine are the witnesses of good and 
bad actions,” she is not separated from these, she is called 
Kritajna. 

Or, Krita, the actions done, jnd, i.e., she rewards 
them by (imparting) knowledge. 

Or, Krita (vat) already-acquired, jntt, knowledge, she 

Krita ; Krita Yuga, the golden age, as then righteous¬ 
ness was perfectly established ; knowledge (jna\ also was 
perfect, i.e., she has perfect knowledge (as the golden age 
had). Q 

According to the science of dice there are four Dytitas 
which are called Krita, tTreta, Dvipara, and Kali, and 
numbered respectively four, three, two and one ; but they 
count ten, six, three and one, respectively ; because in the 
higher number the lower ones are included. So the S'ruti 
(Chcha. Up., IV, 3-8) says, “ Now these five and other five, 
mahe ten, that is (represents) the Krita cast.” Hence, 
according to the science of Dytlta, he who conquers the 
Krita, is understood to have conquered the other three. 
For the S'ruti (Chcha. Up., IV, 1-4) says, “ As in the game 

1 Such ornaments are worn by a married woman only during 
her coverture. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


183 


of Dice all the lower casts belong -to him who has 
conquered with the Krita cast.” The meaning is like the 
Krita cast, her knowledge is all-pervading and all- 
embracing. 

Or, she knows the Krita cast. The expression is that 
she always conquers when she casts the dice with Siva. 

375. Worshipped by Kama. (.Kamapttjita.J 

The Arunopanishad (Tai. Ar. I, 11) says, “ (There is a) 
bodiless son of Lakshmi; though he is without mind, he 
has life. He acquired that jewel (the Panchadasl 
mantra),” « 

376. Filled with the essence of love. (S'ringararasa- 
samj5ftr»a.) 

Or, as he refers below to the Jalandhara and Oe/hyana 
centres (PI/has) these two (375 and 376) represent the 
Pi/has called KamarOpa and Pftmagiri. S'ringa, two {i.e. 
two horns) ara, petal, rasa, six (i.e., six flavours), so 
S'ringCtrarasa means, the centre called Anahata which has 
twice six petals. Sum, frequently, puma, remains, i.e., 
she frequently remains in that centre. According to the 
Tantras, the well known four centres in the elements 
(AdhibhOta, viz., Kamarttpa, etc.,) remain in the body in 
the Mtlladhara, Anahata, Vis'uddhi, and in the Ajna respec¬ 
tively. Hence this name (indicates) Analjjta and Pttmagiri. 
centres (in the body and in the world). 

Or, S'ringa chief, arara, Covering, that is to say the 
Avidya which veils ; Sa, with sampiirna, Brahma (lit. 
perfect), i.e., she is both the conditioned and unconditioned 
Brahman. 

377. Victorious. (Jaya.) 

According to the Padma Pr. “Jaya is the deity wor¬ 
shipped in the Varaha mountain.” 

378. Remaining in the Jalandhara. (Jalandharasthita.) 

According to the Padma Pr. Jalandhara is a place 

where she is worshipped under the name of Vishnumukt-l, 

(82) 



184 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


17th verse divides 44 names. 

379. Abiding in the centre called Odhyana. (OrfhySna- 
pUha nilayS.) 

380. Dwelling in the centre of Bindu. (Bindumandala- 
vasinl.) 

Bindu mandala, the centre called Sarv/Xnandarnaya. 
Some explain that Bindu means white, Mandala, circle, 
i.e., the Brahmarandhra. 

381. To be worshipped in the secret by sacrificial 
rites. (Rahoyagakramaradhya.) 

The Acharya (San. La. S'l. 9) says : “ In the Sahasrara 
lotns, in the secret place, you sport with your husband.” 
Baho, in the secret (in the Sahasraral, y&ga, the sacrifice 
of the eight oblations of good actions, etc., in the fire of 
chit Supported by the golden KunrfalinI ; or Rahoydga 
means the meeting (of S'iva and S'akti) in a lonely place (in 
the Sahasrara) ; Krama , stepping into (that place) ; arOdhya 
is to be attained. 

Apastamba says, “ Salvation is not for him who con¬ 
fines himself to scriptural words alone, nor for him who 
delights in fine houses, or in rich food and clothes or in 
worldly ideas ; but the man of firm vow, who leads a lonely 
life and has ceased from (worldly) pursuits, attains salva¬ 
tion, and he wjro constantly rejoices in meditation on the 
Self and who neVer injures anything, attains salvation.” 

382. Gratified by thet^ecret oblations. (Rahastarpana 
tarpita.) 

The Aruna. Up. also (Tai. Ar., I, 11) says, “ If one 
would enter, let him enter, having practised lonely com¬ 
munion.” According to the method of devotion to the 
SrlvidyS one should only adopt the path after having 
recognised the higher self. Rahdslarpana : A Mantra 
describes it thus : “ Holding in both hands, representing 
brightness and darkness (Prakasa and Yimars'a) the sacrificial 
ladle of Unman! (a Yogic state), pouring out the ghee of 
righteousness and unrighteousness and the senses (Kalas) 



LALITA SAHASHANAMA 


185 


in the fire of consciousness, I sacrifice.” Another descrip¬ 
tion is, “I sacrifice the Universe from Earth to S'iva in the 
fire of samvit, ever burning without fuel, and ever-increas¬ 
ing, dispelling the darkness of illusion, the centre from 
which ever emanates beautiful rays.” (83) 

383. Conferring immediate grace. (Sadyahprasadini.) 

She is at once gratified by the sacrifice and oblation 

mentioned above (381 and 382). 

384. Witness of the universe. (Vis'vasakshini.) 

385. Herself unwitnessed. (Sakshivarjita.) 

There is no witness to the one who is the witness of 
all things. 

• 386. Accompanied by the deities of six limbs. 
(Sharfanga devatayukta.) 

The Angas (limbs) are heart, head, tuft of hair, eyes, - 
armour and weapons. She is accompanied by the S'aktis 
belonging to these. The Jnanarnava and other works say, 
‘‘Next he should perform the consecration of the limbs 
which belong to the S'rtvidyamantra. This, one should 
perform externally in order, afterwards, he should worship 
the surrounding deities (which are three in number). By 
these (Avarana) deities the number nine is completed. 

Or, Shadangas devatCL is S'iva who presides over the 
six angas. The De. Bhag. Pr. says, “ Omniscience, content¬ 
ment, non-original wisdom, independence, unfading power 
and infinity, these, say the learned, are the six angas of the 
Lord Mahes'vara.” 

Or, Shadangas are phonetics, ceremonial (kalpa), 
grammar, lexicography, prosody, and astronomy. Sur¬ 
rounded by the deities of these six, means the Vedas are 
her form. 

387. Possessing the six qualities. (Shadgunya pari- 

pfirita.) 

The six gunas, according to the EAmandaka (ethical 
code) are, peace, war, marching, sitting encamped, dividing 
his forces and allies. The Puranas, give out the following : 

'24* 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


180 

“ Prosperity, righteousness, fame, wealth, wisdom and 
dispussion.” <84) 

388. Ever compassionate. (Nityaklinua.) 

Or, Nityaklinua is the deity of the third day of the lunar 
fortnight. This deity has been described in the Garuda Pr. 
beginning with the verse, “ Next I describe Nityaklinna 
. . . she is Tripura herself giving happiness and salvation.” 

389. Without an equal. (Nirupama.) 

The S'ruti (&ve. Up., 4, 19) : “ None is equal to him.” 

390. “ Conferring the bliss of Nirvana. (Nirvana- 
sukhadayini.) 

Nirvana : nir, freed ; vdna (or Ba«a) body ; because 
in the S'ruti (Pra. Up., II, 2), “ Holding this bow (body),” 
and in the word “ Glrva-na ” by the Vedantins and Mlmam- 
sakas this word is explained as body. The Amaras’esha 
also says, “ Bana means body and bow.” So here Nirvana 
means without body, i.e., indescribable bliss. In the 
Ktlrma Pr. Devi says to Himavat : “If you neglect me, 0 
king of mountains, you cannot attain the pure rest of the 
supreme Nirvana, therefore seek refuge in me (regarding 
me) as one, as many, or as combined ; thus worshipping 
me, 0 great king, you will attain that state.” 

391. In the form of sixteen eternal deities. (Nitya- 
shodas'ikarUpa.) p. 

The sixteen aeities are from Kames'vari to Tripura- 
sundari. 1 The Tantraraja says, “ The fifteen deities are the 
limbs of LalitA who is the first (of the sixteen); as she is 
endowed with these limbs she is the body, of which they 
are parts.” 

Or, nitya, compulsory ; a frequent; shodagika, a 
house where gralia sacrifice is performed; rSpa pleased, 


1 The names of the fifteen Nitya deities are as follows: (1) 
Kames'vari, (2) Bhagamaliul, (3) Nityaklinna, (4) JBherunda, (5) 
'Vahnivasini, (6) Mah&vajresvarl, (7J S'lvad&ti, (8) Tvarita, (9) Kula- 
sundarl, (10) Nitya, (11) Nilapatakinl, (12) Vijaya. (13) Sarvamaugala, 
(14) Jvatainalini, (15) Chitra, and (16) Tripurasundarl. See the 
Bhavani Up. Prayogavidhi by BhAskararaya. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


187 


i.e., she is pleased by the compulsory sacrifices. The 
S'aksi Rahas’va says, “ The mother is as much pleased by a 
single repetition of the Shodas'I (sixteen-syllabled mantra) 
as by crores of Vajapeya and of Shodasl sacrifices.” 

392. Possessing half the body of S'rlkantha. (S'rl- 
kanfhardhas’arlrini.) 

S'rlkantha : S’ri, poison, Kantha throat, as the poison 
is fixed in his throat, S'iva is called S'rlkan/ha. She forms 
one body with S'iva. Hence the Br. Up. (1, 4, 1 to 3) says, 
“ In the beginning this was Self alone ... He then divided 
himself into two, and thence arose husband and wife.” 

Or, like S'iva, she has a body of two colours, one half 
of the body is blue and the other half is white. The Vsyu 
Pr. says, ‘‘That beneficent one, having the half of the 
body of S'ankara and the right half of her body is white, 
and the left is llilue ; thus divide my body, said Brahma to 
Devi. 0 twice-born ones, thus of the two forms one 
became Gauri (white) the other Kali (blue).” 

According to the Miitrikakos'a “ A means S'rikanfha, 
Indra, forehead, and Vishnu.” , Thus S'rlkantha, is A. 
The letter A is half the body of the other letters in Speech. 
Thus it is said in the S'ruti,—“ A is all the speech, that 
(A) takes on different forms in combination with the 
different consonants ” (lit. with Spares, i.e., Ira to ma 
and with tlsbraa, S'a, etc.). The meaning is, that A, the 
first utterance, is the Para form which becomes (later on) 
the Vaikarl. So the So. Sam. (IV, 47, 59) : “ The supreme 
BakU, Devi, the form of chit, arises as speech, that 
(speech) is called Para. I ever bow' down in devotion to 
that S'akti who is the half body of S'iva.” 

Or, Devi v 7 ho has only half a body, the other half is 
called S'rikanfha, i.e., the fulfiller (of the half). This is 
also explained in the same book (SO. Sam., IV, 47, 60). 
“The S'akti called desire is filled in the belly of S'iva.” 
This means in the S'aiva school in the performance of 
Nyasa (.meditating certain deities on different parts of the 



188 


I.ITA SAHASRANAMA 


body) half the body is filled by the PQrnodarl and other 
S'aktis and the other half by S'rlkantha of S'iva. 

Or, when we write the letter A (S'rlkanfha) half (ardha) 
of it is like the Kamakcda (/.«., 3f-)-?[:=: 3?). (85) 

393. Luminous. (Prabhavatl.) 

Prabha, the surrounding Avarann Devatas, viz., 
anima, etc., becanse there is a saying, “ (Devi) is surround¬ 
ed by Anima and other luminaries.” Some learned Jains, 
Haribhadra and others record in their works Dharma- 
sangrahinf, etc., “ The rays are the qualities,^hey are not 
the substratum ; among these eveD, the quality of bright¬ 
ness is not the substratum.” 

394. In the form of brightness. (Prabhartlpa.) 

This indicates the identity of the quality and . the 
possessor of it. Prabha, Anima and other Devatas. The 
S'rnti (Chcha. Up., 3-14-2) : “ Mind itself, brightness itself.” 

395. Celebrated. (Prasiddha.) 

Because Devi is known by all in the shape of ‘ I ’. The 
De. Bhag. Pr. says, “ That (Devi) all men recognise under 
the form of ‘ I The first verse of the same book also 
says, “We meditate upon the primeval Vidya in the form 
of the Universal Chaitanya.” 

396. Supreme ruler. (Parames’varl.) 

397. Mftlaprelcritih. (Primary cause.) 

Mala, root, i.r.., the S'rlvidya mantra, prakriti (origin) ; 
She is in the form of two letters Prakas'a («) which is the 
origin (of all other letters) and Vimars’a (ha, the last letter). 

Or, Main,prakriti is the matter of the Sankhya School 
for, they say (Is’vara. Ka., Ill) : “ MQlaprakriti is no 
production. The seven, Mahat, etc., are productions and 
productive. The sixteen are the modifications. The 
Purusha is neither Prakriti nor (it’s) modifications.” 

According to the Mrigendra Sam., the KundalinI is 
called Mftlaprakriti with its seven productions (Mahat, etc.); 
as it (the Kunr/alinO is surrounded by Sushnmna which is 
in the form of seven (productions), viz., Mahat, etc. 



lAlita sahasbanama 


Or, of the five elements from ether to earth, each is 
the Prakriti (origin) of succeeding one ; of ether Brahman 
is the Prakriti; for the S'ruti (Tai. Up., II, 1) says, “ Prom 
the Self arose ether.’’ That Brahman has no Prakriti. So 
he is the root (Mftla), the first cause. In the Pancharatra - 
Ag. S'iva says, “ There is one mother of the Universe, the 
mother of the Scriptures, Sasasvati, who has no origin ; 
hence she is called MtUaprakriti. In her, I took birth with 
the categories, vi.z., Mahat, etc.” 

This is to be understood here. Amongst thft actions 
(Karma) which are to become ripe in a certain time, those 
that ripen are exhausted by fruition, the others which are 
not rape and have not come (consequently) to fruition, a 
new creation for their sake being useless, a Prakrita 
(temporary) pralaya (dissolution) takes place. .Then Maya, 
consuming all the world, and absorbed into the independent 
Paramas’iva, who is without attributes : it (Mayal abides 
thus, till the ripening of the remaining actions. It is said, 

“ In the dissolution, this animate and inanimate universe 
is merged in that (Maya).” The Yishnu Pr. also says, 
“ The earth, the basis of all, 0 divine Kishi, becomes 
dissolved into water, water is absorbed by fire, fire is 
absorbed into air, air into ether, this into the unmanifested 
(Avyakta), this 0 Brahmana, is entirely absorbed in the 
unconditioned Purusha.” The Avyakta is ,Maya. The 
dissolution of it (Maya) is not absolute annihilation as in 
the salvation (Nirvana) ; but like the mental modifications 
in the state of sleep, as there is no appearance of the 
modifications of Maya (during pralaya). Though (at that 
time) by the power of the illumination of the unconditioned 
supreme Self, it (Maya) receives light, yet it remains as if 
it has no light. If there is no light at all (to the Maya) 
then there is no existence of it. If you accept this theory, 
there will be no succeeding creation. 

The modification of Maya in the form of desire of 
creation arises in Paramas'iva for the sake of bestowing the 



190 


LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 


fruit on those whose unripened actions are absorbed in 
Maya ; when their actions become ripe in course of time, 
that state of Maya is variously named by the words ‘ sight,' 
‘desire,’ ‘thought,’ ‘ desire of action,’etc. The Aitareya 
Up. (I-I) says, “He thought, let me create the worlds.’* 
The Chcha. (Up., VI, 2-3) : “ It thought, let me become 
many.” The Tai. (Up., II, 6): “ He desired, let me become 
many.” The Mun. (Up., I, 1,8): “ By penance Brahman 
is increased.” This manifestation of Maya, characterised 
by objective distinctions, is the first creation, the creation 
of darkness (Tamassarga), void of consciousness. The 
S’ruti (Rigveda, 10-129) beginning with “There was no 
being, in that time, nor, was no being. ... In the 
beginning darkness was hidden by intelligence,” and also 
confirm the above. “ From that, the Avyakta arose, 
etc.” 

From this (creation) called Tamos, in which the three 
qualities (gunas) were differentiated, arose the creation of 
partially manifested, Mahat. This is the second creation. 
It is said, “ From Ayakta comes the category of mahat in 
which are distinctly manifested the three gunas ; so also 
from mahat ahankara.” From that (creation of Mahat) 
arises the third, the creation of Ahankara in which the 
three gunas are manifested objectively. It is said, “ From 
Mahat arose the threefold egoism, vis., VaikSrika (pure), 
Taijasa (passional) and Tamasa (dark), which last is the 
origin of the elements.” Here, as ‘ Titmasa is the origin of 
the elements,’ it follows, that the rest of the creation belong 
to Satva and Rajas. * a 

From that Tamasa egoism which is called the origin of 
the elements, arose, with the aid of the Rajas, the creation 
of the five subtle elements (Tanmatras). This is the fourth 
creation. 

From the pure egoism called Vaik&rika, with the aid 
of Rajas, arose the creation of the aggregate of eleven 
senses. This is the fifth creation. 



L'ALITA S AH A AN AM A 


191 


From the Rajas egoism, the deities, Dik, Vat a, Arka, 
Prachetas, As’vins, etc., who are the deities of the above two 
(fourth and fifth creations). This is the six creation. 

For the Sankhyas say (Is'. Ka., 25) : “ From the pure 
egoism arose the eleven S’atvic creation (senses) ; from the 
BhOtadi (Tnuiasa egoism) the subtle elements, and from 
Rajas egoism (the deities presiding over both).” 

But- in the S'aiva school it is said, from pure egoism 
comes mind, from passional egoism, the ten senses ; 
thus there is a difference. For the Shivas say, “ It (mahat) 
becomes threefold by differentiation of S'atva, Rajas and 
Tanias ; that is called by names Vaikarika, Taijasa and 
Bhtitadi ; from Taijasa mind comes, from Yaikarika senses, 
from BhOtadi the subtle elements. Thus are the creations 
from that (mahat).” 

These six creations are called Prakrita (belong to 
Prakriti). 

The Vaikrita (belong to products, mukat, etc.,) creation, 
comprises trees, etc., whose life current tends upwards, 
animals, whose life-current is hoizontal, and Btitha, Preta, 
etc., whose life-current tends downwards. 

These Prakrita and. Vaikrita creations, taken together, 
are called the Kaumara creation. The Vi. Bhag. Pr. says, 
“ The first is the creation of mahat, therein the inequality 
of the gunas arises. The second is egoism, therein arises 
object, (Dravya) knowledge, (Jnana) and action (Kriya). 
The third is the creation of the elements, therein arise the 
subtle elements, having the energies of Dravya. The fourth 
is the creation of the senses, which consists of knowledge 
and action. The fifth is the Vaikarika, the creation of the 
Devas, which consists of mind. The sixth is the creation 
of Tamas which is the creation of the all-pervading (Maya) 
devoid of knowledge. These six are called Prakrita crea¬ 
tions. Hear from me the Vaikrita creation, etc.” 

Here the creation of Tamm called Avyakta, is the 
sixth in the order, but according to its meaning, it should 




192 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


be taken as first. In this connection the V3yu and other 
Prs. should be consulted. 

In these creations beginning with the Avyakta creation, 
the previous one is the origin of succeeding ones. Brahman 
alone is the origin of the Avyakta. So as he is the root of 
all creations, and as he has no root, he is the root matter. 
(Mhlaprakriti.) Hence the S'ruti (Katha Up., 3-10 and 11) 
says, “ Beyond the senses there are the objects . . . 

Beyond the Mahat, the Avyakta, beyond Avyakta there is 
the Person. Beyond the Person, there is nothing. This is 
the goal, and the supreme abode.” 

Or, ma, five, i.e., the five subtle elements and to, three, 
i.e., Avyakta, Mahat and Ahankara, therefore Jf>?to,«eight, 
Prakriti, causes. The Samitsa S'tttra 1 says : “ There are 
eight Prakritis.” 

398. Undeveloped. (Avyakta.) 

He now proceeds to praise Devi under the form of the 
creations in order. 

Avyakta is the manifestation of Maya. 

According to the Sankhya school, it is expressed by 
the words, Pradhana (foundation), Prakriti (matter) and 
other words. It is said in the Sankhya Saptati “ That is 
the Avyakta which is subtle, without characteristics, inani¬ 
mate, without beginning or end, capable of production, 
without parts, one and universal,” Panchas'ikhachSrya also 
says, “Pradhana, say the wise, is the Avyakta, which is 
without beginning or middle, beyond Mahat, and per¬ 
manent.” It (Avyakta) is the collective form of the three 
qualities. The Sankhya S'titra (VI, 39) says, “ S'atva and 
the rest are not q ualities of that (Brahman), because they 
are the qualities of that (Avyakta).” 

Or, Avyakta means Brahman for in the place (Ved. Sft.) 
Ill, 2-23) it is said, “That (Brahman) is Avyakta for the 
scriptures say so.” The S'ruti (Mun. Up., 8), “ He is not to 

> May mean the abridged S'utras of Sankhya and we get some 
MSS. of the same. 



Lalita sahasranama 


193 


be felt by the eyes, nor by the speech, nor by the other 
deities (senses), nor by penance, nor by action.” 

Or, Avyakta means Vishnu. The LingaPr. says, “The 
names of Vishnu, -who is ever capable of creation, are 
Pradhlina, Avya5 r a, Yoni (origin), Avyakta, Prakriti and 
Tamas.” 

399. In the form of manifested and unmanifested. 
(Vyakt-Avyakta svarhpint.) 

Vyakta, the category Mahat, it is called so because it 
was first manifested and also from its greatness. Avyakta : 
A, on all sides, Vyakta, manifested, i.e., egoism, the 
product of the above. 

•This (name) may be taken as two names, if the name 
Brahma jananl (822 and 823) is taken as one. According to 
this view, vyakta is the supreme egoism (Parahanta), for 
supreme egoism is in the form of TripuraSundarl, because 
she is manifested in the category of egoism. 

Or, she is in the form of both manifested and unmani¬ 
fested. That is, she is and is not subject to the modifica¬ 
tions of the elements. The Linga Pr. says, “ Vyakta is 
called Sat (existence), as it is the second modification of the 
elements ; Avyakta is called Asat because it is devoid of 
that (modification).” 

Or, Vyakta, perishable and Avyakta, imperishable. 
The Matsya Pr. says, “ Vyakta is said to be perishable and 
Avyakta, imperishable.” 

Or, Vyakta, individual, and avyakta, collective form. 
The Nrisimha Pr. says, “ The Avyakta is known as collec¬ 
tive, and vyakta, 0 Lord of ascetics, is individual.” 

According to the Brahmfl. Pr., “ The wise say the 
seventy-three categories are meant by the word Vyakta and 
by the word Avyakta, the supreme Prakriti.” 

Or, vyakta, avyakta and yyaktavyakta■ ; thus there are 
three kinds of Liny as (of Siva). She is in all the forms. 
The three kinds of Lingas are described in the Br. Vaivarta 
Pr. : “ There are three Lingas, vis., Svuyambhuva 



194 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


(self-existing), Banalinga (got from a certain river) and Saila 
Linga (made of stone), these are respectively called Vyakta, 
Avyakta, and Vyaktavyakta. Vyakta, they say, gives 
salvation, the Avyakta, gives (worldly) happiness, and 
Vyaktavyakta gives both happiness and salvation. The 
Bana Linga is said to be that which outweighs even two 
or three Tulas (a weight). The rest are called S'aila (mere 
stone) by the learned.” 

Or, She is manifested (Vyakta) in those whose deeds 
are ripened ; and is not manifested (Avyakta) in those who 
are bound by the noose (of Maya). The S'aktirahasya says 
when it describes the descent of the S'akti (.into man) : 
“How do you say that the supreme S'akti which is all- 
pervading descends, the descent is from above down¬ 
wards ; only that which has form and is not all-pervading 
can descend ? True, she is all pervading, eternal, co-existent 
with Sava ; yet she is hidden in those who are bound by 
the noose of the impurity, action, etc., and manifested in 
them whose sins are burned out, in this way she is said to 
descend.” (86) 

400. All-pervading. (VySpinl.) 

She is called all-pervading, because she assumes the 
forms of the three creations of the threefold egoism (vide 
name 379). 

Thus ends the fifth Kala, called Jvalini with the 
fourth hundred in the SaubhagyabhSskara composed by 
Bhaskararaya. 


THE FIFTH HUNDRED 

401. Multiform. (Vividhakara.) 

The different forms of the Vaikrita creation, or of the 
kaum-tra creation (for Vaikrita and Prakrita, vide 
name 397). 



IjALITA sahasranama 


195 


402. In the form' of knowledge and ignorance. 
(Vidyavidyasvarftpinl.) 

Vidya and avidya are explained in the Is'a (Up., 11) : 
“ One who knows both knowledge arid ignorance having 
crossed over death by ignorance and attains immortality. 
by knowledge.” 

Or, Vidya, knowledge of the Self, Avidya, the know¬ 
ledge in the form of the last modification (of duality, i.e., 
just before realisation). The Br. Naradlya Pr. says, “ The 
supreme S'akti of that Vishnu, capable of absorbing the 
universe, in the form of existence and non-existence, is 
sung as Vidya and Avidya." The De. Bhag. Pr. also, 

‘ She is Brahman himself, very difficult to attain and in 
the form of Vidya and Avidya." In another place, “ 0 
King, know, that Vidya and Avidya are two forms of 
Devi ; by one men are freed, by the other they are 
bound.” 

Or, Vidya, the knowledge in the form of the last 
modification of duality or of the false knowledge (Charama- 
vritti). Avidya, confused knowledge of separateness ; Sva, 
the knowledge belonging to supreme Brahmin ; because 
according to a Lexicography, “ Sva means, relations and 
Self ” ; r'lpa, these three are her form. The Linga Pr. 
says, “ Siva has three forms, Bhranti, Vidya and Para. 
The knowledge of different objects is called Bhranti 
(confused) by the learned. Knowledge in the form of Self, 
is called Vidya. Knowledge concerning Brahman without 
ambiguity is called Para (supreme).” 

403. The moonlight which gladdens the kumuda 
flowers of the eyes of Mahakames'a. (Mahakaines'anayana 
kumudahladakaumudl.) 

Kaumudl (moonlight) may mean the full moon of the 
month, Kartika. The Yadava says, “ Kumuda (neu.) 
means water-lily, red lotus, and (in masc.) ape. Kanmnda 
means the month Karlika and Kanmudi, the moon of 
that month.” 



196 


LALITA SAHASRANAJ1A 


Or, ku, inferior, mud, pleasure, Kaumuda are those 
who long for worldly pleasures. They are called inferior 
because (their pleasures) are mixed with pain and for other 
reasons. So Kailmuda means a miserable one. The 
Sas'vata and Vis'va say, “ Kumut means inferior men and 
water-lily.” A, full, Hlada, joy, i.e., salvation. A man 
attains that stage by being led (unyana) to MabJkJmes'a. 
Kaurnudi, light. The meaning is she becomes, out of pity, 
light, as it were, to them who are blind in worldly 
pursuits. • (87) 

404. She is the sunbeam which drives out the dark¬ 
ness from the heart of her devotees. (Bhakta hSrda 
tamobhedabhanumatbhanusantatih.) 

405. S'iva is her messenger. (S'ivadfltl.) 

The Mark. Pr. says, “ As S'iva himself was made a 
messenger by that Devi, she was known in the world as 
S'ivadfltl.” Some commentators think that she was made 
a messenger by S'iva. But this (interpretation) is without 
authority. 

This is the deity of the Pushkaratlrtha. The Padma 
Pr. says, “ Now I will tell you of other deities. She who 
lives in the Pushkara . . . Sivadflti, the beneficent, 

ever conferring happiness.” 

406. Worshipped by S'iva. (SivaraddhyA.) 

The BrahmS. Pra. says, ‘ ‘ Even S'iva by worshipping 
whom, by meditation, by the power of Yoga, becomes the 
lord of all Siddhis, and becomes half-female (Ardhna- 
ris'vara).” 

S'ivadftti is a certain mantra of four parts worshipped 
by'S'iva. 

407. In the form of S'iva. (S'ivamflrtih.) 

Because there is no separation between S'iva and 
S'ak'ti. The Shuti says, “ One Budra hidden in all beings, 
he is with May5, with parts and without parts. He is 
Devi himself, and is not separated from her. By know¬ 
ing this, one attains immortality.” Or S'iva, beneficent. 




RAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


197 


Mfirti form; Or S'iva, Salvation, Marti, form. Because 
salvation is-the realisation of the very Self. The Saura. 
Sam. : ‘ ‘ Now I shall explain concisely to you the nature 
of salvation . . . Hence the supreme salvation is 
the realisation of the Self, those who were bound by. 
AvidyS, are freed by VidyS.” 

40S. Giver of happiness. fS'ivamkari.J 

She makes her devotees happy (S'iva) by removing 
the noose of Avidya and leads them to Brahman which 
is to be attained by liberated souls. Or, S'iva means 
suspiciousness and Karl giver. (88) 

409. Beloved of S'iva. (S'ivapriya.) 

Or Siva is loved by her. 

410. Beyond Siva. (Sivapara.) 

Because the position of Siva depends upon Sakti. Or, 
to whom Siva is the supreme. (Para) ; or she reveals 
Siva (to her devotees). 

411. Desired by the wise. (SisWeshta.) 

S'ishta ordained ceremonies which are dear to her 
(Ishte). 

S'ishta : she is worshipped by the ordained cere¬ 
monies. It is said, “ The Lord should be worshipped by 
means of ceremonies according to one’s caste and order, 
and not by (mere) offering scent, flower, etc.” The 
Bharata and Br. Naradlya Pr. say : “ Righteousness arises 
from conduct, the Lord of righteousness is Vishnu.” 

According to the Vashistha S'Otras “ The S'ishtm are 
those who. always control their limbs, eyes, speech, and 
whole body, who receive the Vedas with their supplements 
by tradition, who are devotees to Brahman, and whose 
every motive directly depends on the scriptures.” 

Or, she is worshipped (Ishtft) by the wise (S'islda). 

412. Worshipped by the great ones. (S'ishtaptijibl.) 

This name clearly sums up the meaning of the pre¬ 
vious one. 

413. Immeasurable. (Aprameyft.) 



198 


LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


Or, A, Brahma, Vishnu, etc., Prameyti, to be known, 
or measured ( i.e ., she is to be known by them only). 

Or, ap, water, prameyG, abiding in. The-Bruti says, 
“ My origin is in the water of ocean.” 

414. Self-illuminated. (SvaprakasSl.) 

The Sruti (Br. Up., 4-3-9) says, “ Here this Person 
becomes self-illuminated.” 

Or, su, much, ap, water, prak&ta, manifested. 

415. Beyond mind and speech. (Manovaehamago- 
chara.) 

Manas includes the functions. of mind. The S'ruti 
(Tai. Up., II, 9—1). “From whence speech and mind 
turn away unable to reach (it).” In the Vishnu Pr‘„ the 
Prahlada’s saying is, “ I bow down to the Supreme 
Is'varl who transcends speech and mind and who can be 
grasped by the' wisdom of the wise alone.” 

Or, in whom is not to be found any object of thought 
or speech. 

Or, A is to be prefixed to the name, then, Manas, 
mind, Vacha, speech, (ima, not purified (lit. unbaked, 
e.g., a clay vessel). A, (not), she is beyond those whose 
mind and speech are not purified and therefore cannot 
be known by them. How is it, the Sfruti in one place 
says, “ The mind turns away, etc.,” and again (in another 
place Katha. Up., 4-11), “By mind alone it should be 
perceived, etc.” This contradiction is removed in the 
Bhamatl (the commentary on Sankara’s commentary on 
Ved. Stt. by Vachaspati Mis'ra) by adding ‘Not purified 
and purified ’ respectively to the word ‘ mind ’- 1 (89) 

416. Chits'aktih. 

Chit, according to the Yaska Smriti and Panini (8, 2, 
101) means comparison. 

Or, ChiUakti, the power of removing Avidya and is 
also termed Chaitanya ; according to the (Sve. Up. V. I) : 

1 The Com. discusses here about the division of some 
according to Chchalakshara Sfutras. 


names 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


199 


“In imperishable and infinite highest Brahman, wherein 
the two, Vidya and Avidya are hidden, one is imperishable 
and the other is perishable ; he who rules these two is 
different from either.” The De. Bhag. Pr. (Book V), “ 0 
king, in all beings there is the Sakti with all its power, ■ 
any being devoid of that Sakti becomes like a corpse. That 
Chits'akti is in all beings, that is but her form.” 

417. In the form of Consciousness. (Chetanarttpa.) 

Sankshepa S'SrlrakachSrya says, “ The pure Chits’akti 

of the supreme Lord is called Chaitanya.” The Gaudapada 
S'fltra (3) also, “S'akti is Chaitanya itself.” The De. Bha. 
Pr., “ We meditate upon that primeval Vidya which is in 
the form of Chaitanya of all, and which guides our senses.” 
This means the tripartite Gayatrl. Hence the Matsya Pr. 
says, “ They know the Bhagavata (Pr.) which begins with 
Gayatri.” In the S'ruti (Tai. Up., II, S-1J : “That of bliss 
(Brahman) is to be discussed.” That, the energy in the 
form of consciousness. Thus the holy S'ankararanya 
explains it in his commentary called Yidyaratna, as the 
Vimars’a form. 

418. The energy of the inanimate creation. 
(Jadas’aktih). 

A certain modification of Maya which is correlative to 
the power which creates the (animate) world, that is this 
(name) simply denotes the creative energy. The Vishnu 
Pr. says, “ The energies of all beings are not to be grasped 
by our intellects. The creative energies of Brahman are a 
hundred times more (difficult to grasp) ; they are in him 
like heat is in fire, 0 best of ascetics. He (Brahman) is 
only the instrumental cause of the creation of the world. 
The creative energies are the material cause. Except the 
instrumental cause, the creative energies depend on nothing. 
0 best of ascetics, an object becomes itself by its own 
energy.” 

'419. The objective world. (Jadatmika). 

420. Gayatrl. 



200 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


The metre consisting of twenty-four syllables is called 
Gayatrl. °The Karma Pr. : “I am Gayatrl among the 
metres ” {vide Bh. Gita, 10-35). 

Or, a cowherd’s daughter is called Gayatrl, who is the 
younger wife of Brahma. This story occurs in the Padma 
Pr. : Once in the Pushkara, when Brahma was performing 
a sacrifice and called Savitri (his wife) who was with 
Lakshml and others. She did not come, but replied, I will 
come with the others ; enraged at this speech he Substituted 
a cowherd’s daughter bestowed by the hand of Indra, and 
thus addressed Vishnu, “Then Brahma said to Vishnu, 
let us hasten for the sacrifice, there is here, 0 Lord, a very 
virtuous woman called Gayatrl. Thus addressed, Vishnu 
replied to Brahma, do you wed this (woman) by the 
Gandharva (form of) marriage. I give her to you, 0 Lord, 
do not hesitate. Take the hand of this cowherd’s daughter ; 
and thus the grandsire wedded (her) by the Gandharva 
marriage, etc.” 

Or, G&yatrl, the mother of the Vedas. According to the 
Bharadvaja Smr., “Because she protects {tra) the singer, 
(Ga) she is called Gayatrl.” As mother is inseparable from 
Gayatrl, she is thus named. The Padma Pr., “ After 
bathing in the. Pushkara, one should repeat me (i.e., 
Gayatri) the mother of the Vedas. Though I abide in the 
eight syllables (of each part), yet this universe is pervaded 
by me.” The Devi Pr., “ As (everyone) sings (Gayana) 
(her), and approach (Gamana), she is called Gayatrl, 
worshipped by Devas.” The Chcha. (Up., Ill, 12-1) : 
“ Sings forth (Gayatl) and protects (Trayate).’’ a The 
Va.‘ Ram., “ Gdyatri, because she is in the form of 
song.” 

421. Vyahritih. 

The utterance, or a certain Mantra. The Vfiyu Pr. 
says, “Addressed by me (vyaharana), you approached, 
hence you are known by the name Vydhriti.” 

422. Sandhya. 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


201 


Sandhya, means, junction also meditation, i..e., the 
idea of the non-separation of ourselves and that of “Chaitanya 
which is in the sun. The explanation (of the word) is 
‘ men meditate ( Dhya ) wholly Sam on her. She is called 
(Sandhya).' The Bhilrata says, “ Sandhya, means the 
Brahman which abides in the Sun and she is meditated as 
one, by Brahma and all-beings who are his rays.” Thus 
those who know the Vedas say, “The aspirant should 
think ‘ I am the servant of that ’ Brahman, who is existence 
and consciousness, and 1 am He.” Vyasa Smr. also, “ Do 
not distinguish Gdyatrl from Brahman, in any case one 
should worship her (saying) ‘ I am She.’ ” The Bharadvaja 
Smr.? “She, who is differentiated as Brahman, etc., the 
witness of action, radiant, the S'akti of Is'vara, is called by 
the wise Sandhya.” The great men’s saying also, 
“ Gayatri with her head (the Mantra Omapah, etc.) and with 
the fourth part is described in the Vedas as Sandhya. 0 
Tripura, thou alone dost decree the result of (even) great 
actions.” So (the great com.) Madhava says, “ The word 
Sandhya means the deity who is to be worshipped at the 
twilights.” The Parijatakara also says, “ As she is alone 
to be meditated upon, she is called Sandhya.” 

This (Sandhya) is the mind born daughter of Brahma. 
The Kalika Pr., “ Born from his mind, beautiful in form, 
having beautiful limbs, named Sandhya. She is the 
victorious deity of the twilights. Because she was born to 
Brahma, while he was engaged in meditation, she is known 
as Sandhya.” The Bhagavatl Pr. : “ Sandhya, who is the 
mind.born daughter of Brahma, after performing penance 
and giving up her body, she became Arundhati (wife of 
Vasishfha).” 

But in the Renuka Pr. it is said, “ Id& is Kali, Pinga- 
la is LakshmI. Sushumna is EkavtrS, thus the Sandhya is 
threefold.” 

According to Dhaumya a year old girl is called Sandhya. 

18th verse divides 38 names. 



202 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


42:1 Worshipped by all the twice-born. (Dvija- 
brindanisfievita.) 

She is so worshipped because she is Sandhya. The 
Rennlca Pr., “ This one Sandhya is to be worshipped by 
Devas, the twice-born and by great souls, in sitting down, 
in lying down, in moving about, in eating and she is 
Renuka herself.’’ 

Or, the three names (421, 422 and 423) 4 Yyahriti,’ etc., 
mean-the following three states. Vyahriti is the operation 
of speech, indicates the waking state. 

Sandhya, because it is between the other two, indicates 
the drgaming state ; since the Yed. Sfitra (III—2—1) says, 

4 4 In the intermediate place there is a creation, for 
the scriptures says so.” And it means the dreaming 
state. 

Dvija means birds and hence the Jivas ; by all these 
three states she is worshipped (Sevita) by realising union 
(ni) with her. The Sleeping State : As birds fatigued with 
flight, fold their wings and enter their nests, so the tired 
Jivas quitting the waking and dreaming states, are absorbed 
in the supreme Brahman. The Br. Up. (4-3-19) says, “ Just 
sa in this sky a hawk or an eagle bird after a long flight 
closing its wings goes to its nest, so this person also rushes 
to that goal, where sleeping he neither desires anything, 
nor sees any dream.” Chcha. Up. (6-8-1) also, “ 0 child, 
there he becomes possessed of Brahman.” (90) 

424. Having the categories as her seat. (Tatvasana.) 

Tatvas, the thirty-six categories from Earth to S'iva, 

Asana a posture called Yogapttha. o 

. Or Tatvas, the categories, asana she rejects (a-s to 
reject). 

425. That. (Tat.) 

The word Tat signifies the revolution of mind ; as Devi 
revolves in all Buddhis she is signified by the word Tat. 

426. Thou. (Tvam.) 

The word Tvam also signifies Devi. 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


203 


427. Oh. (Ay I.) 1 

This word is used in interrogation, Devi is'addressed 
by this word as she is the mother of all. 

Or, ayl, fortunate one. 

428. Residing in the five sheaths. (Pancha kos'anta- 
rasthitha.) 

These five (kos'as) are the five employed in the worship 
of the five (deities). These five are, according to the 
JnSnarnava, “ S'rividyS Paramjyotis, Para, Nishkalas'Sm- 
bhavl, and the AjapSmantra, and these are called the five 
sheaths.” When we worship these five in the S'rlchakra, 
the last four Paramjyotis, etc., are to be worshipped 
individually and collectively in the Srishii and other 
Chakras which are surrounding (the S'rlchakra). But the 
S'rlvidya is the Bindu in the centre. Thus she is in the 
midst of the five sheaths. 

There are in our bodies the five sheaths called Anna- 
maya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, VijnUnamaya and Ananda- 
maya, each involved in the preceding one, of these five, the 
innermost last is the Anandamaya, with that she is identified. 
In the Ved. Sft. (1-1-12 to 19) by the Vrittikara it is 
explained that ctnandamaya is Brahman. But our holy 
Acharya says, that anandamaya sheath is not Brahman 
because it is impure and is included among the annamaya 
and other sheaths which are to be abandoned (lit. puri¬ 
fied). In that case, according to S'rlkaniha Bhashya and its 
commentaries, the anandamaya is in the form of Chit S'akti 
which is the body of Brahman, who is the ParSkasa itself ; 
as w§ see (in the Tai. Up., II-7-1), “ This ether is Ananda 
(Brahman).” 

In the opinion that “ Brahman is the support of the 
Anandamaya,” the meaning is that she is in the centre of 
these five (sheaths). This (we think) is correct, because the 
Brahma Gita (3-45 and 46 of So. Sam.) confirms this verse. 
“ So the Anandamaya also is filled by another Brahman, 
o 1 Bh. N4ra. makes the three names (425—427) as one ‘ Tatvamayl.’ 



204 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


which is the witness, omnipresent. That Brahman is called 
the support which is existence, wisdom, and unity. That 
is the one ever remaining essence. 0 great Devas, do not 
think otherwise.” 

The KrodhabhaMSraka (Durvasa) also says, “ 0 mother, 
blazing with radiant light, he, who knows you as surround¬ 
ed by the five sheaths, Anna, Prana, Manas, Buddhi and 
Ananda, with the marks of head, wings, support (lit. tailj 
and -trunk, described by the words of the Mahopanished, 
indeed is the knower of Brahman.” 

429 Illimitable Majesty. (Nisslma mahima.) 

4§0. Ever young. (Nitya yauvana.) 

Because she is devoid of old age in the three periods 
(present, past and future.) 

431. Shining with rapture. (Madasralinl.) 

Mada, a kind of bliss, untainted by worldly things. (91) 

432. With reddened eyes rolling with rapture. (Mada 
gMrnita raktakshl.) 

Grh'irnana (rolling) turned away from worldly things. 

433. With cheeks blushing with rapture. (Mada 
paiala gandabhtlh.) 

Patala, rose colour. 

Or Mada, musk, Pdtala, a kind of flower, by these her 
cheeks are painted and perfumed. Mada, according to the 
Yis'va means, “ semen, musk, pride, joy, rut of an elephant, 
and liquor.” 

434. Her body smeared with sandal paste. (Chandana 
drava dagdhangi.) 

435. Fond of the Champaka flower. (Champeyaku- 

sumapriya.) (92) 

436. Skilful. (Kus'ala.) 

As she exhibits skill in the creation, etc. Or Kura, 
water, la, receiver. 

Or, ku, inferior, .rala, moon, i.e., as she is possessed of 
greater brightness, the moon is inferior in comparison. 

437. Of graceful appearance. (Komalakara.) 0 



L.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


205 


438. Kurukulla. 

This deity is located in the tank, called Vimars'amaya, 
in the Sricbakra, in the space between the walls of Chit 
and Ahankara ; concerning that tank, the Lalitastavaratna 
(S'!. 97) says, “ I ever meditate on that Kurukulla, who 
resides in the ruby, Kuruvinda, whose waist is bent by 
the weight of her breasts which put mountains to shame 
and whose body is smeared with red paste.” This deity 
is described in the twenty-second chapter of the Tantraraja. 

439. The ruler of the triad. (Kules'varl). 

Kula, the triad, viz., the measurer, the measurement, 
and the thing measured. 

440. Abiding in the Kulakunda. (Kulakandalayfl.) 

Kulakunda is the bindu, which is in centre of the 

pericarp of the Mflladhara. It is like the small cavity in 
the centre of the pericarp of a lotus. 

Or, Atoya, the place of rest (in the sleep), that is the 
place of rest of Kundalinl. Acharya (Sau. La. SL 10), 
“After reaching your own place assuming the form of a 
coiled serpent you sleep in the cavity of the Kulakunda.” 

441. Worshipped by those, devoted to the Kaulapath. 
(Kaulamirgatatpara sevita.) 

Mary a, the path handed down by family tradition. 
Kula, it is so called because it is connected with the 
Maladhara. The Vratakhanda says, “ That Devi who 
is established by family custom, should be worshipped 
in that (customary) way by offerings, scents, etc. . . . 

She is to be worshipped by oblations, etc., in the family 
customary way.” 

Or, there are three modes in the worship of Devi, 
viz., Samaya, Misra, and Kaula. The first is the path laid 
down in the Vedas and also described in the five Agamas 
of S'uka, Vasishfha, etc.' The second is that, which is 
described in the eight Tantras, CliandrakalS and others. 
It is called mired because it partakes of both (modes). 

Kaula mode which differs from the above two is 



206 


I.ITA SAHASRANAMA 


described in other Tantras. Kaula is so called because 
it is sought for by the Kaulas. The characteristics of these 
modes of worship and of their devotees are described in 
the corresponding Tantras. (Vide Ananda Laharf S"l. 
31 Com.) (93) 

442. Mother of Kumara and Gananatha. (Kumara- 
gananathamba.) 

Kumara, Skanda : Gananatha, Ganesa. 

Or Ku, inferior, Maragana, the aggregate of passional 
ideas (Yikara), Nathan, the lords, of the above. Amba, 
the binder (or destroyer). 

Kumara, the Ahankara (egoism) whose deity is Ku¬ 
mara. The Varaha Pr. says, “ Vishnu is the Persdn, or 
S'iva by that name is called. Avyakta is Vma or 
Lakshmi, the lotus eyed. Ahankara arises from the 
interaction of these (two). This (egoism) is the Guha 
(Skanda), the leader of the army.” She binds those who 
possess the qualities of egoism. 

443. Contentment. (TushJih.) 

There are seven names, viz., contentment, nourish¬ 
ment, wisdom, might, tranquility, benevolence, beauty. 
He procoeds to praise Devi under these names. 

The Mark. Pr. says, “ The goddess who resides as a 
contentment in all beings, adoration to her.” The same 
is given in the Mallari Mahatmya, “ The god who, etc.” 
The De. Bha. Pr, (Book III), “ That mother as is well- 
known, is in all beings in the form of understanding, 
fame, firmness, prosperity, energy, faith, intelligence 
and memory.” According to Padma Pr. Tushfi is a deity 
in the. Vasrapatha Tirtlia. 

444. Nourishment. fPushtih.) 

This deity is in the Devadaruvana. 

445. Intelligence. (Matih.) 

Mati is explained in the Vayu Pr. thus, ‘‘Purusha 
bears the measuring (rod), understands division and thinks 
himself composed of parts, hence he is known as Mali .’0 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


207 


The So. Sam. (So. Gita 8-89) says, Mati is the form of 
Devi: “ Let us adore that S'iva who is worshipped by 
Vishnu and others, who is the bestower of bliss, who is 
know'n as Mati derived from experience, supreme, who 
knows (lit. measures) the Vedas, beneficent.” 

446. Fortitude. (Dhritih.) 

This is the deity worshipped in the Pindaraka place. 

447. Tranquility. (S'ftntih.) 

Or, S'anti, a certain Kala (part) belonging to Vayu. 
The S'aivagama says, “ That which gives place to a man 
(struggling with) the flood of impurity (of anu), illusion 
(of Maya), and change (of Karma), that Kala is called 
S'anti*. That is the abode which is the seat of dominion.” 
The Br. Parasara Smr. also, “ Beyond the fifteen finger’s 
breadth from the end of the nose where the Jiva is purified, 
is the sixteenth part . . . that Kala is called S'anti.” 

448. Ever true. (Svastimati.) 

Su, exceedingly, asti, being, mat, having. Beeause 
her being is supreme reality and not what ordinary people 
think to be reality. The S'ruti (Br. Up., 2-1-20) says, 
“The senses are truth, this (Brahman) is their reality.” 
“ That (Brahman) is the real of the real.” 

Svasti, according to the Ratnakos'a means, “ Benedic¬ 
tion, benevolence, sinless, holy, auspiciousness.” Yaska 
also, “ Svasti means immortality.” 

449. Effulgent. (KSntih.) 

Or Kanti, is the Ichcha S'akti. 

450. Daughter of Nanda. (Nandinl.) 

Or, Nandinl, a certain cow born in the family of the 
celestial cow (Kamadhenu) ; or nandinl, Ganga. 

451. Destroyer of obstacles. (Vighnanasini.) 

Viqhna, hindrances to knowledge, (94) 

452. Splendour. (Tejovatl.) 

Because She is the support of the Sun and other 
luminaries. The S'ruti (Br. Up., 8-8-11), “ In this indes¬ 
tructible (Brahman) the Sun and Moon were established.” 



208 


LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


453. Three-eyed. (Trinayana.) 

The three eyes are the moon, the sun and the fire. Or, 
Trinayana, is another name for the word vaushat (particle 
of invocation of gods). Or, Nayana, indicates proofs, 
Naya , to lead, i.e., leads one to proof. The Sandilya 
Stitra (99) says: “There are three proofs, viz., word, 
inference, and observation like Rudra.” (Rudra has three 
eyes, neither more nor less, similarly there are three 
proofs.) Here S'aMa (vocal authority) corresponds to 
S'ravana (Hearing, etc., of Br. Up., 2-4-5) ; inference, as 
it is mental, to Manana (perception) and observation to 
Nidhidhybsana (reflection). But occasionally different 
ideas may intrude this (reflection), hence the ascetic 
S'andilya (Stt. 99) takes 8'abda first (because the last is 
more important). UpamaywHiUustration, the third proof) 
is omitted here because it is not required. Hence Manu 
(Smr. S'lo. 12, 105) enumerates three only. “ Perception, 
inference, and scriptures, consisting of different branches, 
these three should be used by those who desire to practise 
righteousness (Dharma).” So S'ankhya (I, 88) and Yoga 
Sfttras (I, 7), repeat the above. 

Or Tri, three (paths), i.e. , south, north and the path of 
Brahman, Naya to lead. She leads those who are entitled 
to have one of the three paths. The Devi Pr. says, “’There 
are the Southern and Northern worlds, and the supreme 
abode of Brahman, as she leads those who follow the right 
way, she is called Trinayana. t 

454. In the form of the desire of women. (Lolakshi- 
k’lmarflpint.) 

■To show her love is not limited to S'iva, she is so 
called. 

Or, she is in the form of Yoges'vari, who is the deity 
of desire. The Varaha Pr., “ (1) desire, (2) anger, (3) 
greed, (4) passion, (5) bewilderment, (6) envy, (7) calumny, 
(8) scorn, thus there are eight mothers. You should 
recognise desire as Yoges'vari, anger as MShesVarl, greed is^ 



LAIslTA SAHASBANAMA 209 

said to be Vaislmavi, passion as Brahm&nl, bewilderment 
is the self-existent Kalyanf, envy as Indraji, the Devi, 
holding in her hand' the death rod (Yamadanda) is 
herself, calumny, and scorn is Vara hi. Thus they are 
mentioned.” 

455. Wearing garlands. (Malinl.) 

Malinl is the name of the deity of fifty-one letters. 

Or, malinl is a companion of Devi," mentioned in the 
Vamana Pr. in the section on the marriage ceremony of 
Parvati. “Then Malinl clasped the foot of Hara. Hara 
said whatever you ask I will give, release my foot. Malinl, 
then replied to S'iva, O Siva, bestow your prosperity on my 
friend, then you will be released. Then S'iva said, I have 
already given, release me, etc.” 

Malinl is a certain metre or the name of Gang a. 
According to the Vis'va, Malinl means, “A certain metre, 
a woman of the florist caste, the city of Champa, Gauri, 
and Ganga.” 

Malinl, according to Dhaumya, is a girl of seven years 
of age. 

456. Swan. (Hamsinl.) 

Or, Hamsa means the Ajapa mantra. 

457. Mother. (Mata.) 

Because she is the mother of all. Or Mata, in the 
form of letters (matrikas). The Sa. Sam, (4-4-18) says : 
“ As she is the mother of all Mantras, hence the Supreme 
IsYari is called Matrika." Or Mata, is the mantra of the 
Nityci deity of the tenth day (of lunar fortnight). Mata is 
the deity, according to the Padma Pr., of the KSyavarohana 
place. . 

Mata is also the name of the Lakshmlbija. The Vis'va 
says, “ Sri, rami and mats, mean Lakshmi.” 

458. Residing in the malaya mountain. (Malayachala 
vilsinl.) 

This deity is described in the S'abara Chintamani as 
the Malayalaya bhagavatl. (95) 

27* 



210 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


19th verse divides 35 names. 

459. Handsome-faced. (Sumukhi.) 

Because by wisdom, the beauty of the face increases. 
The S'rutis say, “ One who knows this, his face shines.” 
(Chcha. Up., 4-14-2) also, “ 0 child, your face shines like 
that of a sage (Brahmavit).” 

Or, Sumukhi is a certain deity to be worshipped as a 
part of the Shodasl (Mantra). 

460. Lotus. (Nalinl.) 

Her hands, feet, face, eyes and other limbs aye like 
the lotus, according to the rule of creation ( vide the com. 
on name 278). 

Or, Nalinl, Gangs. Or Nalinl: Nala, a king b£ that 
name, as he was identified with Devi by devotion, she is 
called Nalinl. o 

461. With beautiful eve-brows. (Subhrflh.) 

462. Handsome. (Sobhana.) 

463. Leader of the Devas. (SuranSyika.) 

The S'ruti says, “ (She is) the supreme power of the 
Devas.” 

464. Wife of Kftlakaniha. (Kalakhanihl.) 

Ktilakantha : S'iva is called so because his throat is 

coloured by poison. Vayu Pr. says, “ In the presence of 
multitude of Devas, Pis'Schas, serpents, and Rakshasas, 
the virulant poison became transfixed in my throat; 
hence I am called Kalakan/Iha.” 

According to the Devi Pr. among the sixty-eight sacred 
places, Kalanjara is a place where Kalakantha is 
worshipped. 

• .Or, Kala a soft low sound, Kaniha, throat, i.e„ a soft 
low sound proceeds from her throat. 

Or. there is a story in the Linga Pr. that in order to 
destroy the Daitya Daruka, “ S'iva created Kali as well as 
KapardinI and Kslakanihl.” 

465. Radiant. (Kantimahih.) 

466. Causing emotion. (Kshobhinl.) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


211 


She excites (Kshub to excite) S'iva to create. The 
Vishnu Pr. says, “ The Lord Vishnu entering the Prakriti 
and Purusha, by his own -will excited (both) at the time of 
creation.” 

Or, Kshobhinl : by the agitation of (her) mind she 
created multitudes of deities. The Varaha Pr. describing 
the TrimMrs says, “ Vaishnavl (the wife of Vishnu) once 
went to the Mandara mountain to perform penance ; after 
she had performed penance for , a long time she became 
excited (by passion) ; from that excitement sprang young 
women of fair appearance, with blue curling hair, with 
lips red as the Bimba fruit, lotus-eyed, with body like the 
red lotus wearing an anklet, beautiful, when the mind of 
Devi was agitated, hundreds and millions of such women 
arose with different faces.” , 

467. Of subtle form. (Sflkshmarllpinl.) 

Sakshma, difficult to perceive. The S'ruti (Kai. Up. 

16) : “ Subtler than the subtle, eternal.” (Katha. Up., 2-20) : 

* More minute than an atom.” 

Or, Sakshma is the name of a kind of Hernia (oblation). 
The Tantraraja says, “ In the eternal and perishable 
centre of the Mttladhara, there is a fire . . . Thus there 

are twelve kinds of Homa corresponding to the letters, as 
mentioned.” 

Or, as said above (vide No. 6, Com.) there are three 
forms, physical, subtle and supreme (and this refers to the 
second one). (96) 

468. Vajres'varl, 

She is the sixth Nitya deity, or the tutelary deity of 
the Jalandhara, Plfha. 

Or, the S'rlchakra has twelve walls, all built of 
diamond ; in the centre of the eleventh, there is a river 
called vajramayl and she is its deity. Durvasa (Lalita 
stavaratna, 44 and 45) says, “ There let the ever flowing 
river called Vajra , be everlasting, filled with the sound of 
the sweet notes of the swans gliding on the beautiful waves ; 



212 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


on the pleasant bank of that river, Vajres'i flourishes decked 
with diamond ornaments praised by the Devas headed by 
Indra, the hurler of the thunderbolt.” 

Or, Devi herself gave Indra the bow, vajra. The 
Brahma. Pr. says when Indra performed penance in the 
water, “ From that water Devi arose and gave Indra the 
bow called Vajra. Again she disappeared and Indra satisfied 
returned to Svarga (heaven).” 

469. Vamadevi. -(The wife of Vamadeva.) 

Vama, to be worshipped, deva, the deity. The Aitareya 
S'ruti says, “ The Devas addressed him ; he indeed is to be 
worshipped by all of us, henfee he is called Vamadeva.” 

Or, vama, by left side, Deva, he shines, • i.e., 
ArdhanArls'vara (half body is S'iva and other half is Devi) is 
called Vamadeva. o 

Or, Vamadeva is one of the (five) forms VyOha of 
S'iva as described in the S'iva Pr., “ Of beautiful appearance, 
red as the red paste (kumbuma), the north face of the Lord 
called Vama is firmly established.” 

Or, Vama, fair ; Vama, the fruits of actions, Devi, the 
presiding deity. Or, Vama, those devoted to the left-hand 
path (Vamachara). The Kalika Pr. says, “ The worshipper, 
who is ever devoted to that path, is called Vama.” She is 
their goddess. The Devi Pr. says, Vama, opposite, inverted ; 
as Devi gives bliss through that path she is called 
Vamadevi. 

470. Exempt from the states of life., (Vayovastha- 
vivarjita.) 

Vayas, the states of childhood, boyhood, youth, etc. ; 
because she is eternal. 

471. Queen of the Siddhas. (Siddhes'varl.) 

The Siddhas, are Goraksha and others. There is also a 
deity of this name at Benares. 

472. Eternal Science. (Siddhavidya.) 

{i.e., the Panchadas'I.) Hence the Panchadas'I is 
exempted from the precautions necessary for other Mantras 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


213 


(Siddh-5rikosh«a). The KiftlimJta says^'vThe (astrological) 
calculations are unnecessary as it is the dternal and 
universal (Mantra).” y „ . 

473. The mother of Siddhas. (Siddhamata.) * 

Mata, protector. 

474. Famous. (Yas'asvinl.) 

The S'ruti (MahSnara. Up., 7-10) says, “Because his 
name is the great fame.” (97) 

475. Abiding in the Vis'uddhi centre. (Vis'uddhi- 
chakranilayS.) 

Now he proceeds to praise Devi, by sixty-two names, 
according to the Yogininy&sa, tinder the forms of the seven 
Yogini deities who preside over the seven chakras, 
Vis'uddhi, etc., whose names begin with the syllables Da, 
ra, la, ka, sa, ha, ya (respectively). The meditation on 
the Dakin! is, “In the Vis'uddhi centre which is in the 
cavity of the throat, in the sixteen-petalled lotus, I adore 
DakinI, the rosy, three-eyed, armed with club, the sword, 
the trident and a large skin, having one face, striking the 
ignorant with terror, ever fond of sweet food (Payasa), 
the deity presiding over the organ of touch, whose form 
is surrounded by Amrita and other deities, and worshipped 
by warriors.” 

Vis'uddhi chalcra : her abode is in the pericarp of 
the sixteen-petalled lotus. 

476. Of rosy complexion, (Araktavarna). 

477. Three-eyed. fTrilochana.) 

478. Arihed with the club, etc. (Kharfvangadi- 
praharana.) 

Khadvanga, (lit.) the foot of a bed, or a club with a 
human skull at its end. 

479. Possessed of one face. (Vadanaika samanvita.) (98) 

480. Fond of milk food. (Payasannapriya.) 

481. The deity of organ of touch. (Tvakstha.) 

482. Filling the ignorant with fear. (Pas'ulokabha- 
yankarl.) 



114 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Pams are those devoid of the knowledge of non¬ 
duality. The Brutis (Br. Up., 1-4-10) say, “ Now one who 
worships another deity (.saying) the deity is different, and 
I am different, he knows not, he is like a beast (Pas'u).” 
“ Fear comes when there is duality ” (Br. Up., 1-4-2). “ To 
him, who makes a small hole (difference), next fear 
comes ” (Tai. Up., II, 7-1.) 

483. Surrounded by amrita and other S'aktis. 
(AmritadimahSs'aktisamvrita.) 

Amrita,, etc., are the sixteen great S'aktis from Amrita- 
karshini to Akshara, each seated in each of the sixteen 
petals. The Svachchanda Tr. says, “ One finger above 
that (Auahata) is the Vis'uddhi with sixteen petals. Dtkinl, 
the supreme ruler is in the centre. Amrita to Akshara 
are in the sixteen petals. Above that is Chandrabimba.” 

484. Dakinis’varl. 

Thus she possesses the nine (475 to 483) attri¬ 
butes. (99) 

485. Abiding in the Anahata lotus. (Anahatabjani- 
laya.) 

In the heart, in the twelve-petalled lotus, called 
Anahata chakra, the Yoglnl named Rakini, resides. 
Her meditation is as follows: “We meditate upon 
Rakini who is in the twelve-petalled lotus of the heart, 
having two faces, with protruding tusks, black coloured, 
bearing the disc, the trident, the skull, and the drum in 
her hands, three-eyed, presiding over the blood, attended 
by Kalaratri and other deities, fond of greasy food, 
worshipped by warriors, and the giver of desired 
objects.” 

486. Black in hue. (S'yamabha.) 

iSy&ma, a girl of sixteen years of age and Abha, like. 

487. Two-faced. (Vadanadvaya.) 

488. With shining tusks. (Damshfrojvala.) 

489. Wearing a garland of Aksha beads, etc. (Aksha- 

maladidhara.) * 



lAi.ita sahasranama ' 215 

The AJcshamMa here stands for the disc in the above 
(485). Alesha, the wheel of a chariot, md, resemblance, 
la, bears, i.e, resemblance of a chariot. 

490. Residing in the blood. (Rndhirasam'sthita.) (100) 

491. Attended by hosts of S'aktis, Kalaratrl, etc. 
(Kalaratryadi saktyaughavrita.) 

There is a certain S'akti called Kalaratrl. Concerning 
the three forms (of Devi) says the Varaha Pr. : “ The 
S'akti of Rudra (Raudri) born from darkness, who went 
to the blue mountain determined to perform penance, 0 
earth, hear her vow . . . That RandrI, the supreme 

S'akti ever devoted to penarfce, causing destruction, is 
called Kalaratrl.” 

Adi (etc.) : twelve S'aktis from Kalaratrl to STankArl, 
one in each petal (of Anahata). 

492. Fond of greasy food. (Snigdhawdanapriya.) 

493. Granting boons to great warriors. (Mahavl- 
rendravarada.) 

Vi, many, ira or ira, excited or intoxicated ; the 
meaning is the Vlras are the (trained orators) gifted with 
eloquence. Or, Mahdvlra, a kind of vessel used in the 
Soma sacrifice, as it is explained in the S'ruti, “ Mahavlra. 

. . .” The meaning is the Mahavlras are those who are 

continually drinking the nectar of Brahman. Indras, those 
who know Brahman. Ida, those who directly realise ( dra ) 
Brahman, which is the Self, the witness of all, saying ‘ I 
am He.’ The Sruti says, “ He perceived, hence he is 
called Indra.” 

Or, Vlrendras are those who realise the fourth state 
(Turiya) in the other three states. The Siva Sfltra (I, 11) 
says, “ He is Vlres'a, who enjoys in a threefold way.” The 
commentator VaradarAja interprets the Sfltra thus, Vlras, 
senses causing the miseries of separateness, extending 
within and without, and tea is the lord of the senses.” 

Or, Mahdvlra, is PrahlAda, and Indra, the lord of the 
Devas. The De. Bhag. Pr. (Book IY) says, That Indra and 



216 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Prahllda praised Devi after their fight which lasted a 
hundred divine years, and she granted them boons. 

20th verse divides 39 names. 

494. Assuming the form of the Mother Rakini. 

(Rakinyambasvartlpini.) (101) 

495. Abiding in the Manipttra lotus. (Manipttrab- 
janilayfi.) 

Manipn.ra is the ten-petalled lotus in the navel. Here 
the YoginI named Lakini resides. Her meditation is : 
“ Let us meditate on Lakini in the eight-petalled lotus of 
the navel, three-faced, tusked, red-coloured, bearing in her 
hands, the dart (S'akti), the thunderbolt, club, and abhaya 
(a weapon), most terrible, attended by Damari and Other 
S'aktis, inspiring the ignorant with terror, presiding over 
the flesh, fond of sweetmeat, doing good to all.” 

496. Three-faced. (Vadanatrayasamyuta.) 

497. Armed with the thunderbolt and other weapons. 
(VajradikSyudhopeta.) 

498. Attended by Damarl and - others (S'aktis), etc. 
(D&mar y adibhiravrita.) 

Adi (etc.), are the ten S'aktis from DSmari to 
Pha/karini. (102) 

499. Blood-coloured. (Raktavarna.) 

500. Presiding over flesh. (Mamsanisiha.) 

Thus ends the sixth Kala called Ruchi with the fifth 
hundred in the Saubh5gyabh3skara composed by Bhasura- 
nanda. 


. . SIXTH HUNDRED 

501. Fond of sweetmeats. (GudannaprltamanasaJ 

502. Conferring happiness on all her devotees. 
(Samastabhaktasukhada.) 

503. Assuming the form of the mother Lakini. 

(LakinyambasvarOpinl.) (103) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


217 


504. Residing in the Svadhistana lotus. (Svadhish- 
thanambujagata.) 

The YoginI called KakinI resides in the six-petalled 
SvadhislVhana lotus; her meditation is; “Wemeditate 
upon Kakini who resides in the six-petalled Svfidhishdiiina 
lotus, four-faced, three-eyed, bearing in her hands the 
trident, the noose, skull and abhaya (weapon), ever proud, 
presiding over the fat (or lymph), fond of mead, attended, 
by BandhinI and others, yellow, fond of food mixed with 
curd, giver of desired objects.” 

505. Four-faced and fascinating. (Ohatnrvaktra- 
manohara.) 

600. Armed with the trident and other weapons. 
(S'hladyayudhasampanna.) 

507. Yellow. (Pltavarna.) 

508. Very proud. (Atigarvita.) Caused by her ex¬ 
cessive beauty, etc. (104) 

509. Presiding over fat. (Medonishfha.) 

510. Fond of mead. (Madhuprita.) 

Madhu, honey or spirituous liquor. The Sruti says, 
“ One who presents an oblation with hony (Madhu), pleases 
the great Devi.” 

511. Attended by BandhinI and others. (Bandhinya- 
disamanvita.) 

These are the six deities from BandhinI to Lsmboshihl. 

512. Fond of food mixed with curd. (Dadhyannasakta- 
hridaya.) 

513. Assuming the form of Kakini. (Kakinlrftpa- 

dharini.) , (105) 

514. Ascending the Mflladhara lotus. (Mflladharam- 
bujarttdha.) 

The YoginI called Sakini resides in the four-petalled 
Moladhara lotus. Her meditation is ; “ We meditate upon 
Slkinl who reside in the four-petalled Mfiladhara lotus, 
live-faced, three-eyed, smoke-coloured, presiding over the 
bones, bearing in her hands the elephant-hook, lotus, book. 



218 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


and JnanamudrA (a gesture), attended by gentle VaradS and 
other deities, fond of eating mudga-beams, intoxicated with 
mead.” 

515. Five faced. (Pancbavaktra.) 

516. Presiding over bones. (AsthisamsthitH.) 

517. Armed with elephant hook, etc. (Amkuffadi 
praharanS.) 

518. Attend by VaradS and others. (Varadadinesbe- 
vita.) 

There are four Saktis from Varada to Sarasvatl. (106) 

519. Fond of food mixed with mudga-beams. 
T M u dga uda n Asak tach itta.) 

520. Assuming the form of Sakini. (Sakinyam- 
basvarflpini.) 

521. Residing over the Ajna centre lotus. (Ajna- 
chakrabjanilaya.) 

There is a two-petalled lotus in the Ajna centre 
between the eyebrows ; there resides the Yogini, called 
Hakini. (The meditation on her is) : ‘ ‘ We meditate upon 

HakinI, residing between the eyebrows, in the two-petalled 
Bindu lotus, white, holding the Jnanamudra, drum, lotus, 
Rudraksha bead, and skull, residing in the marrow, six¬ 
faced, three-eyed, attended by Hamsavatl and other S'aktis, 
fond of saffron-flavoured food, doing good to all.’’ 

522. White. (S’uklavama.) 

523. Six-faced. (Shadanana.) (107) 

524. Presiding over the marrow. (Majjasamstha.) 

525. Attended by Hamsavatl and other 3'aktis. (Ham- 
savatimukhyas'aktisamanvita.) & 

The two S'aktis are Hamsavati and Kshamavatl. 

526. Fond of saffron flavoured food. (Haridran- 
naikarasika.) 

527. Assuming the form of Hakini. (Hakinl- 

rtlpadharini.) (108) 

528. Residing in the thousand-petalled lotus. 
(Sahasradala padmastha.) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


219 


In the Brahmarandhra in the thousand-petalled lotus, 
resides the Yogini named Yakinl. (Her meditation is) : 
“ We meditate upon the beneficent Devi, Yakinl, residing 
in the moon of the pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus 
in the Brahmarandhra, presiding over the semen, armed 
with all kinds of weapons, facing on every side, attended 
by the host of the S'aktis of the letters from A to Ksha 
(fifty-one), all coloured, fond of all kinds of food, and 
devoted to the supreme S'iva. 

529. Brilliant with all colours. (Sarvavarnopas’obhitS.) 
Or, Sarva , all, Varna (the fifty-one) letters from A to 

Ksha, that is the fifty S'aktis from Amrita to Kshmavati ; 
upa ,»in the petals. Counting these (fifty) backwards and 
forwards we obtain a hundred S'aktis ; these each reside in 
ten petals. TJpa means ten (according to the Yararuchi’s 
rule pa one and u, ciphor), i.e., each residing in ten petals. 
Hence some repeat in the Yoginlnyasa ten times each of 
those S'aktis to make up a (thousand). 

530. Armed with all weapons. (Sarvuyndhadhar't.) 
The S'ruti (RudradhySya) says, “You have thousands 

of arms and thousands of weapons.” 

531. - Residing in the Semen. (S'uklasamsthita.) 
According to the Bha. IJttara Pr. S'uMa. is the name of 

a kind of meditation at the time of sexual enjoyment. 

532. Facing on every side. (Sarvatomukhi.) 

(Bh. Gita, 13-13) ; “ Everywhere eyes, heads, and 

mouths.” (109) 

21st verse divides 31 names. 

533. Fond of all l^inds of food. (Sarvaudanaprlta- 
chitta.) 

534. Assuming the form of the mother yakinl. 
(Yakinyambasvartlpinl.) 

535. Svaha. 

536. Svadha* 

Thus having described (Devi) under the forms of 
Yoginls, he proceeds to describe (Her) with other qualities. 



220 


I/ALFTA SAHASRANAMA 


The words Svaha and Svadha are used when oblations 
are offered to gods. The Ko^a says, “ The words Svaha, 
S'raushat, Vaushat, Vasha/, and Svadha are used when the 
oblations are offered to Devas.” Hence these two words 
indicate Devi herself. The Mark. Pr. says, “ There are 
seven words which are used in the Soma (sacrifice), in 
the oblation and in the cooking. By repeating (or uttering) 
your name (only), O Devi, the merit of repeating these 
names are obtained by Brahmavadins.” In another place 
(DeviMaha.) : “ By uttering your name all the host of gods, 
O Devi, is satisfied in all sacrifices, for thou art Svaha and 
thou art named Svadha, the word which gives satisfaction 
to the hosts of Pitris.” The Prapanchasara explains the 
meaning of these words thus : “ Sva means heaven and 
also the Self, aha the attainment. . . . and Svaha is the 
wife of fire.” 

According to the Tai. S'ruti, “ Your own {Sva) speech 
(aha) ” means one’s own speech. The Samaveda Bra. the 
Yaska Nirukta also explain ‘ Svaha ’ thus, “ Su well aha, 
speech, or Sva, Self, aha, to speak.” Some others explain 
this, Su, good, aha, to be given as an oblation. Or Sva 
one’s own people, aha, to go, i.e., she recognises the people 
as her own Self. Or su, well. A, Brahma, ha, to go. Or, 
Svaha is the wife of S'iva in the form of fire ; she is the 
mother of Skanda. The Linga Pr. says, " The wife of S'iva 
in the form of fire is said to be Svaha. The divine six¬ 
faced one (Skanda) is called by the wise the son.” The 
same confirms the Vayu Pr. also. According to the Padma 
Pr. this is the presiding deity of the city of Mahes'vara. 

. Svadha : su, well, A, Vishnu, dha nourishes (or 
protects). 

537. Devoid of intelligence. (Amatih.) 

Amati, is Avidya or, A, little, inati, knowledge, i.e., she 
is in the form of the knowledge of modifications. Durga- 
charya in his commentary (on S'ukla Yajus) explains the 
word amati, as the knowledge of the Self. 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


221 


Or avtaiti, as said before ( vide No. 397) refers to the 
first creation which was devoid of intelligence. 

533. Intelligence. (Medha.) 

The next creation was accompanied by intelligence. 

Or* Medha, individual intelligence. The Devi Msha. 
says, “ Devi who resides in all beings in the form of 
intelligence ” ; and “ 0 Devi, thou art intelligence, thou art 
the essence of all the scriptures.” 

According to the Padma Pr. the deity called Medha is 
in the country of KSs'mlra. 

539. S'rutih. (Scriptures.) 

540. Smritih. 

The Yedas and the Smritis of Manu, etc., are but her 
form. The Kflrma Pr. says, “ Rigs, Yajus, Saman, and 
Atharvana are the inherent form of Brahman, thus is the 
eternal S'akti.” 

Or, S'rut/i and Smriti, the knowdedge in the form of hear¬ 
ing and recollection. The Vayu Pr. says, “ As She recollects 
all actions, present, past, and future, she is called Smriti.” 
The Devi Pr., “ (She is the Smriti) because she recollects.” 

541. The best. (Anuttama.) 

Because there is none superior to her. The S'ruti and 
Smriti (S've. Up., 6, 8, Bh. Gita, 11, 43), “ Nothing is to 
be found equal or superior to him.” The De. Bhag. Pr. 
(Book III) : “ People never say of a man devoid of strength 
‘ he is deprived of Rudra or of Vishnu,’ but say, ‘ deprived 
of S'akti’ (energy).’' 

Or, Anutta, not depending, md, intelligence or 
dominion, i.e., whose intelligence or dominion is not 
derived from others. (110) 

542. Famed for righteousness. (Punyaklrtih.) 

Whose fame sanctifies. 

543. Attained through righteousness. (Punya- 

labhyS.) ^ 

Punya, good actions performed in previous births. 
The De. Bhag. Pr. says, “ Only those ever righteous 



LALITA S AH ASEAN AMA 


ascetics, who are devoted to wisdom, see ; but the men 
of desire see not the holy and beneficent Devi.” 

544. Hearing of and praising (thee) are holy. 
(Punyas'ravanaklrtan.'i.) 

545. Worshipped by Indra’s wife. (Pulomajarchita.) 

This story occurs in the De. Bhag. Pr. (.Book VI) : 

when Nahusha was ruling the heaven, the wife of Indra 
worshipped Devi that Indra might be restored. “ Thns 
addressed, the wife of Indra with cheerful mind received 
the powerful mantra of Devi, from the teacher (Brihas- 
pati) and worshipped earnestly Tripurasundari, by 
oblations of food, flowers, etc. ...” 

546. Remover of bonds. (Bandhamochini.) * 

Bandha, bonds of ignorance or prison. 

In the Harivamsh, Aniruddha says, “ 0 SAnkari, 
thou art praised by these and other names by me ; by 
thy grace, let me be soon freed from prison. O large¬ 
eyed one, behold, I take refuge in thy feet. You are 
to liberate me from every bond . . . Durg5, the 

powerful one, thus praised, set free the brave Aniruddha, 
who was confined in the town of Bana.” Thus the De. 
Bhag. Pr. also (Book YI) says, “ Once a princess named 
Ek'ivali was imprisoned by a Daitya called Kalaketu, -was 
freed by Devi who was worshipped by Yas'ovatJ, the friend 
of the princess.” 

547. Wavy haired. (BarbaralakS.) (Ill) 

548. In the Vimars'a form. (Vimars'arttpinl.) 

Vimars'a is the (first) inherent vibration of Para- 

brahman who is in the Prakis'a aspect. The Saubhagya 
Sudhodaya says, “ In that (Brahman) there is an inherent 
S'akti in the form of vibration called Vimars'a. That 
(S'akti) produces the animate and inanimate universe, the 
same also destroys it.” 

- Or Viinarm means significant -v&ords (t.e., speech). 
The Matrikiiviveka says, “Without Vimars'a (speech) how 
is thought (PrakSs’a) manifested ? Without thought to be 



LAIilTA SAHASRANA.MA 223 

spoken of, how can there be Speech ? Therefore thought 
is req uired for the existence of speech, and thought, even 
when there is self-consciousness (for its own existence) 
required speech.” 

549. Vidya. 

Because she is the Vidya which confers salvation. 
The Dev! Maha. says, “ The holy supreme Devi is 
Vidya.” The Gaudapada Sotra says, “ She herself is 
Vidya.” She means Devi as described in the previous 
Sutra as “in the form of absolute consciousness ”. 

Or Vidya, a certain kind of Kola, which is in the 
light (Tejas) and its nature is described in the S'aiva 
Tantras. “ By the discrimination of the products of Maya, 
one recognises the state of wisdom, that supreme Kola is 
known as Vidya, consisting of knowledge and action.” 

550. The mother of the universe (consisting) of 
ether, etc. (Viyadatijagatprastlh.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Up., II, 2), “ Ether arose from 
Atman.” 

551. Alleviating all diseases. (Sarvavyadhipras'amani.) 
Vyaddi, old age, etc. 

552. Dispelling all death. (Sarvamrityunivarinl.) 
Mrityu, untimely death, fatal disease, etc. The 

Brutis (S've. Up., 4—15, Katha. Up., 3—15) say : “ Know¬ 
ing Him thus, he breaks the nooses of death ” ; “ He is 
freed from the power of death.(112) 

553. The first. (Agraganya.) 

As she is the root cause of the whole universe she is 
the first to be enumerated. 

Or, Ganya, the hosts (of Mantis, etc.), she is the first 
commander of these. 

554. Of unthinkable form. (Achintyarapl.) 

Because she is free from connection with the qualities, 

her nature is unthinkable. 

555. Destroyer of sin in the Kali (age). (Kali- 
kalmashanaslnl.) 



224 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


She destroys the sin which necessarily predominates 
in the Kali age and which cannot be destroyed by others. 
The Kdrma Pr. says, “ Water is able to quench the fire, 
the presence of the sun to dispel darkness, and the repeti¬ 
tion of the names of Devi, to destroy the multitude of sins 
in the Kali age.” The Brahma. Pr. : “ The remembrance 
of the feet of Supreme S'akti is said to be the highest 
expiation for sins consciously or unconsciously com¬ 
mitted.” 

556. Katyayani. 

The daughter of a Rishi named Kata. This is the name 
of the deity in the collective form of the brightness (.Tejas) 
of all the Devas. The Vamana Pr. says, “ That brightness 
which is the best, and the greatest, is known in the world 
by the name of Katyayani. Under that name she shines 
and is celebrated in the world.” 

According to the Kalika Pr. this is the deity at Odh 
y3na. The Devi Pr. says, “ Ka, means Brahma, head and 
the philosopher’s stone ; as she supports or rests upon 
them, she is called Katyayani.” 

557. The destroyer of time. (Kalahantrl.) 

Kala, death. TheS'ruti (S've. Up., 6-2) says, “ Omni¬ 
scient, time of time, possessed of all qualities, all¬ 
knowing.” 

558. Worshipped by Kamalaksha. (Kamalakshani- 
shevita.) 

The Padma Pr., “ Vishnu ever worships the sapphire 
Devi, hence he attained his own state.” (113) 

559. Her mouth is full of betel. (Tambdlapdrita- 
mpkhl.) 

560. Of the hue of pomegranate flower. (Dadiml- 
kusumaprabha.) 

The pomegranate (Darfima) tree is a kind of tree which 
bears no fruit, but only flowers. 

561. Fawn-eyed. (Mrigakshl.) 

562. Enchanting. (Mohinl.) 



LAI.ITA SAHASBANAMA 225 

The Laghu Naradlya Pr., “Because, 0 beautiful one, 
this whole universe is enchanted with thee, thy name shall 
be the enchanting one, which is derived from its own 
qualities.” 

Or, at the churning of the ocean, Vishnu assumed the 
form of MohinI and that deity resides on the bank of the 
river Pratara. The Brahma. Pr. says : “ As the result of 
his meditation there first appeared to Brahma, the S'akti. 
who is called Prakriti, who fulfils the desires of the gods.: 
Her second appearance causing enchantment of all, 
transcending mind and speech, was during the churning 
(of the ocean) for nectar, seeing which even the omniscient 
S'iva was enchanted . . . The form obtained. as the 

result of meditation, unequalled, marvellous, meditating 
with one mind on that (form) you will be emancipated,” 

563. The first. (Mnkhya.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Up., 3-10-6), “I am the first born 
of truth.” 

564. The wife of Mrida. (Mridanl.) 

Mrida , the giver of happiness, i.e., Paramas'iva. 

22nd verse divides 31 names. 

565. The friend. (Mitrarftpini.) 

Or Mitra (the twelve) suns. (114) 

566. Eternally pleased. (Nityatripta). 

Or Nitya, happiness itself. 

567. Treasure of the devotees. (Bhaktanidhih.) 

Niddhi , which fulfils desire. 

568. . The guide. (Niyantrl.) 

Because she is the guide of the universe. 

569. Ruler of all. (Nikhiles'varl.) 

570. To be attained by the idea of cheerfulness, etc. 
(Maitryadivasanalabhya.) 

There are four kinds of ideas, viz., friendship, 
compassion, complacency and indifference ; these apply 
respectively to the happy, the miserable, the virtuous, and 
the sinful. These are explained in the Vi. Bhag. Pr. These 



226 


LAUTA SAHASRANAMA 


purify the mind. The -wise Bay (Magha 4-55), “ They, 
whose minds are purified by friendship, etc., removing 
their sorrow and who obtaining here (in this body) the seed 
of Yoga, and attaining glory by discriminating Purasha from 
Satva (Matter) and who remaining in SamAdhi (the highest 
state of meditation), desire to transcend even that state.” 
Refer to Yogastitra also (I, 33). The commentator Raja- 
martanda says, ‘ happiness, etc..’ indicates the persons who 
are happy, etc. 

571. Witness of the great dissolution. (Mahapralaya 
sakshinl.) 

As Brahma, Vishnu, etc., perish at that time of the ’ 
dance of S'iva at the great dissolution, she alone is the 
witness (of that dance). It is said, “ Bearing the noose, 
the elephant hook, the bow of sugar-cane, and the arrow of 
flowers, your form alone remains victorious, witnessing 
the dance of the divine Parabhairava, bearing the axe at the 
time of dissolution of the universe.” (115) 

572. The Supreme energy. (ParSs&ktih.) 

In the body the tenth elementary substance (Dhatu) is 
called Para S’akti. The Kamikagama says, “ Skin, blood, 
flesh, fat and bone, these (five) substances are derived from 
Devi; marrow, semen, breath, vitality (Jiva), these (four) 
substances are derived from S'iva. Thus this body consists 
of nine substances derived from nine origins. The tenth 
substance alone is called Para S'akti.” 

Or, the S'ruti (S've. Up., 6-8) says, “ His supreme S'akti 
is known in different forms.” The Linga Pr. : “ Whatever 
energy is attributed to any substance that is Devi, the ruler 
of all, energised substance is the great S'iva. Those sub¬ 
stances which possess energy are the manifestations of S'iva. 
The wise recognise the energies in substance to be Devi.” 

Or ParSmantra also is called Paras'akti. 

573. Supreme end. (Paranishrtia.) 

Or Paranishtha : a certain kind of knowledge. This 
alone is the goal of all desires and) all worlds. The Bh. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


227 


Gita (4-33) : “ 0 Partha, all kinds of actions end in know¬ 
ledge.” That kind of knowledge is described in the Stt. 
Sam. (SOta Gita, 5-50 to 54) : “ Convinced by instruction 
derived from the scriptures and from teachers, and by 
reasoning in conformity with the scriptures, that he is 
himself the witness of all, his mind becomes fixed, know¬ 
ing the whole which appears different from Self as his own 
Self, again fully convinced by his own experience that he 
himself is the pure, non-dual Brahman ; merging that 
conviction in his own pure consciousness which is un¬ 
changeable and non-dual ; knowing that even that merging 
is of the nature of thought (chit rtlpa), he should remain 
as the absolute. This ascetic is indeed the best of those 
who know Brahman ; this is the highest end (the result) of 
scriptural teachings and of experience.” 

574. Concentrated kno wledge. (PrajniinaghanarUpini.) 

Pra, superior, i.e., different from the mental modifica¬ 
tions, jnUna, the eternal wisdom, ghana, concentrated, i.e., 
not contaminated by Avidyii. The Sruti (Br. Up., 4-5-13) : 
“Just as taste of a quantity of salt is neither inside nor 
outside but everywhere, so O wife, this Self is neither with¬ 
in nor without, but is full and concentrated knowledge.” 

575. Languid by drinking wine. (MadhvJpanalasa.) 

576. Intoxicated. (Matta.) 

Or Matta, state of egoism, i.e., the Parahanta of Para 
Siva. 

577. In the form of matrika letters. (Matrik?.varna- 
rttpinj.) 

Or Matrika letters from A to Ksha, varna, colours, 
white, etc., Rnpim, Devi is in the form of these. The 
Sanatkumara Sam. says, “ Vowels beginning with A (16) 
are smoke-coloured ; Ka and others (to da, 13) are ved ; 
Dha to pha (9) are yellowish ; the five letters Ba, etc., are 
crimson ; Sa ; etc., (5) are of the colour of gold ; Ha and the 
last (Ksha) are of the colour of lightning.” Some Tantras 
differ in this : “ The vowels (16), are the colour of crystal 



228 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Ka to Ma (25) are the colour of coral, Ya and others (to 
ha, 9) are yellowish, and Ksha is crimson.” Some say, 
all the letters are white. The Matrikaviveka says, “ A is 
all divinity, red, controlling all things . . Thus to 

each letter a different colour is given. 

Or, the fifty-one letters (A to Ksha) are her form 1 
Varna , the letters, ritpa, indicates (her). The SO. Sam. 
(IV, 4, 21 and 22), says, “Just as the Supreme S'iva is 
twofold as S'akti and Siva, so this M&trikSt Devi herself 
shines in two. The vowels indicate one form of S'akti, the 
others (consonants) indicate of S'iva. Thus the (Devi) of 
Vidya under the form of letters indicate S'iva.” The com¬ 
mentator on this explains A, etc., means S'rlkantha and,other 
forms of S'iva and as well as POr/iodar! and other S'aktis. 

Or, wearing the garland of letters (AkshamalS, A to 
Ksha). The JnSnarnava says, “ A is the first, 0 Devi, and 
Ksha is the last, thus she is called AkshamSla (garland 
consisting of letters A, to Ksha). She is the Brahman-Word 
itself, bat in reality she transcends the Word.” 

Or, M&trik&varna, letters, rapa, (she) creates. Refer 
to the Saubhagya Sudhodaya wherein is described in order, 
the origin of the letters through the Ichchas'akti belonging 
to S'iva in his Anuttara aspect. 

Or, M&trikavcirna, letters, which belong to the S’rl- 
chakra; this is described in the Sixth chapter of the 
Matrikaviveka ; hence the Sanandana Sam. says, “ Medita¬ 
tion on the letters and on the S'rlchakra as one is called 
Kailasa PrastSra. 

According to some, this name is divided into two as 
Matrika, (Mother) and rarwartlpinl (in the form of letters.) 2 

' ' ( 116 ) 

’ There are three Prastiiras, viz.. Meru, Kailasa, and BhG Prasiaras. 
The 1st is to identify the sixteen Nity& deities, the 2nd with the 
Matrika (51 letters), and the 3rd is with the eight Vas'inis. 

2 In the Varivasy&rahasya the word matri&a is explained thus : ma 
means limits or measures, tri, crosses, ka, shines, i.e., one who knows 
Matrika letters, knows Brahman (ma), croupes samsara and shines. 




LALITA SAH ASK AN AM A 229 

578. Residing in the great Kailasa. (Mahakailasa- 
' nilaya.) 

Mahakaiiasa is a place much beyond the present Kailasa 
(mountain), known in the Siva and other Prs. as the abiding 
place of Paramas'iva. 

Or, Mahakaiiasa means as above, the Kailasa Prastara 
(of S'richakra). Or, kailasa, the Sahasrara which is in the 
Brahmarandhra. The Tripurasara says, “ This is called 
Kailasa, the Kula, 1 and the seat of Akula, where the lord of 
the lords (S'iva) in the form of bindu resides.” Mahal 
(great) because Vas'inl, etc., the Nit-ya deities, which belong 
to the other Prastaras, have no place in this one, hence it 
is tha great. 

579. Her creeper-like arms are soft as the lotus stem. 
(Mrinalamridudorlata.) 

580. Illustrious. (Mahaniya.) 

581. Personification of mercy. (Dayamtlrtih.) 

582. Resplendent with wide dominion. (Mahasamra- 

jyas'alinl.) (117) 

583. Spiritual knowledge. (Atmavidya.) 

Atmavidya may mean eight-syllabled Mantra (Atrna- 

sh/Skshara Mantra.) 

584. Exalted science. (Mahavidya.) 

Because it removes all sorrows. 

Or, Mahayidya, Vanadurga Mantra. 

585. Sacred science. (S'rlvidya.) 

Or, the Panchandas'I Mantra. The Vishnu Pr. says, 
“0 fair one, the sacrificial Science, exalted science, secret 
science, and spiritual science, 0 Devi, thou art all these, 
the bestower of salvation ; also thou art Logic, Trayi, 
Varta, trade and justice.” The commentators on the above 
say : The meaning of the 1st four are—Science of action, 
devotion to deities, the science of Mantras, and the Science 
of Brahman, Yarta, architecture, medicine, etc. 

586. Attended by Kama. (Kamasevita.) 

1 The lower six chakras from Ajua to Mulidhara are called Kula. 



230 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Kama, Mahakama. 

Or, Kama, the bodiless one (god of love). The Arnn. Up.' 
(Tai. Ar., 1-11), “ The bodiless son of Lakshmf, though with¬ 
out mind, has animation. He knew that jewel (Srlvidya). 
He, though without fingers, worshipped (folding his hands). 
Though without neck, he adorned himself (as with a neck¬ 
lace). Though without tongue, he tasted it. Without know¬ 
ing that Rishi (seer) one should enter the city. When one 
enters, he should enter after performing secret rites. This 
is the vow of Manmatha.” Without mind (Achetas), with¬ 
out eyes he saw the jewel. Since he saw it without eyes, 
he touched it without fingers, wore the necklace without a 
neck, tasted without tougue, he is the seer. The external 
chakra (worship) can be entered (performed) by knowledge 
of him alone ; since no ceremonial worship is necessary (in 
order to enter the internal chakra), the Rishi need not be 
known. Secret rites, i.e., the knowledge of the essential 
equality of S'iva with Devi. The meaning is that worship 
performed without the knowledge of the essential equality 
of S’iva with Devi cannot be fully effective. 

587. The science of sixteen syllabled (Mantra). (Sri 
Shodas'AksharividyS.) 

Though the Gaudapada Sutra (67) says, “This Mantra 
consists of twenty-eight syllables,” yet there will be no 
contradiction, if we divide the fifteen syllabled Mantra into 
three divisions (and add some syllables more between the 
divisions). Or, it means a Vidya where in the Sixteenth 
syllable (Sri) is used. 

588. Three peaked. (TrikO/Sa.) 

. Tri, may mean Brahma, etc., the three states (waking, 
etc.), the three seats (Jalandhara, etc.), the three worlds, 
three qualities, etc. ; or Trikhta means Vagbhava and other 
Kutas. 

589. The spirit of Kama. (Kanjakotika.) 

Kama, Paramas'iva, because the essential equality of 
Siva with Devi is Brahman itself. (118) 




LAtlTA SAHASRANAMA 


231 


590. Attended by millions of Lakshmls subdued by her 
glances. (KattkshakinkaribhQta kamalakotisevitfi.) 

591. Residing in the head. (S'irassthita.) 

S'iras, Brahmarandhra, wherein she resides assuming 
the form of the Guru. 

592. Moon-Wee. (Chandranibha.) 

There is a moon in the lower part of the Brahma¬ 
randhra, that is the third division of the Vidya (Pancha- 
dasl). 

593. Residing in the forehead. (Phalastha.) 

She resides in the forehead in the form of the Bindu of 
the syllable Hrlm. 

594. Rain-bow hued. (Indradhanushprabha.) 

The Nityahridaya (Yoginihridaya, I; 28) says, “The 
Ardhamatra (i.e., Dot or Bindu of Om or Hrlm) is in the 
forehead in the form of the light; above that there is the 
Ardhachandra in the same form (i.e., of light) and it is a 
quarter of that ’’ (i.e., Matra consists of 256 lavas ; Ardha¬ 
matra, 128 and Ardhachantra 64 lavas).” (119) 

595. Residing in the heart. (Hridayastha.) 

Because she is to be contemplated as in the heart. 

Or, Parablja is called Hridaya. The Kalpa Sutra : “ He 
who knows the heart of the Lord finds happiness at every 
step.” Here heart means the Parablja. 

Or, Hridaya, a IJpanished called Parames'varahridaya. 

Or Hridaya, the Seed of the universe, because it is the 
seed of all. The Anuttaratrims'ikasastra : “ Just as a great 
Baniyan tree is contained potentially in a tiny seed, so the 
animate and inanimate universe resides as a seed in the 
heart.” 

23rd>erse divides 35 names. 

596. Resembling the sun. (Raviprakhya.) 

In, the heart there is a solar disc, that is the second 
division of the Mantya (of Panchadas'l). 

597.. The light within the triangle. (TrikonSntara- 
dlpika.) 



232 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


There is a triangle in the pericarp of the M&tftdhftra, in 
that there is a disc of fire, that is the first division (of the 
Panchadas'i). The Tantraraja says, “ In the eentre of the 
eternally manifested Mfiladhara of all beings, there is a 
fire ; similarly in the heart, there is the sun. In the head 
below the Brahmarandhra, there is the moon. Thus, the 
first, the ancient (Mantra) is threefold.’’ • 

Or, when the sun circumambulates the eight-angled 
Meru mountain, he illuminates only three angles (at a 
time) ; for when the sun is at zenith in the city of Indra, it 
is sunset and sunrise in the cities of soma and of Yama 
respectively. The Vishnu Pr. says, “When the sun (at 
midday) passes over either of the cities of the gods, his 
light extends to three cities and two intermediate points : 
when situated in an intermediate point, he illuminates two 
of the cities and three intermediate points.” 1 The meaning 
is that she illuminates at a time the three cities which are 
in the triangle form. 

598. Daughter of Daksha. (Dilkshayanl.) 

According to the Vis'va, DakshayanI means, “ the wife 

of S'iva, RohinI and constellations.’’ 

Or, Dakshayana means a certain sacrifice repeating the 
performances the Dars'a and Ptlrnamasa sacrifices. 

599. Slayer of Daityas. (Daityahantrl.) 

Daityas, Bhaiidasura, etc. 

600. Destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksha. (Daksha- 
yajnavinSs’inl). 

There are two Dakshas, one is known as PrajSpati and 
the other is a human king, an incarnation of the former. 
Though S'iva destroyed both of their sacrifices, Devi was 
the instrument (of the destruction). The Brahma and Vayu 
Prs. say, “ After consulting the seven Rishis, he cursed 
Daksha (saying), become a human king in the Chakshusha 


I For further details see Wilson’s translation of Vishnu Pr., Book 
II, Chaps. VIII and III—1—11, and The Arctic Home in the Vedas 
by the Lok. Tilak. 




LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


233 


■cycle. You will be born of a M'lrisha (caste) woman, as the 
son of Prachetas, and as the grandson of Prachinabarhis, 
and you will be known by the name of Daksha. ... 
Desiring to please Devi I shall destroy your sacrifice.” (120) 
Thus ends the seventh Kala called Sushumna with the 
sixth hundred in the Saubhagyabhaskara composed by Bha- 
surananda. 


. SEVENTH HUNDRED 

601. With slowly moving large eyes. (Darandolita- 
■dirghakshi.) 

Or, Dara , fear, Cbndolita, driving out, i.e., her glances 
dispel the fear of her devotees. 

602. Whose face shines with smiles. (Darahasojva- 
lanmukhi.) 

603. Assuming the form of the teacher. (Guruintlrtih.) 

The Sundari Tapaniya Up. says, “ Just as the words, 

pot, vessel, etc., mean the same thing, so (the words) Man¬ 
tra, Devata and Guru mean the same thing.” The meaning 
cf the word ‘ Guru ’ is given in the S'aktirahasya. ‘ ‘ Gu 
means darkness, and vii removes that.” In another place, 
“Gu, existence (i.e., Brahman,) and ru knowledge, because 
he is one with the knowledge of Brahman, he is called 
Guru.” The Nityahridaya also : “ One should meditate 
upon that Devi who assumes all forms at will, as the 
Guru.” 

604. Treasure house of qualities. (Gunanidhih.) 

The Sanbhya doctrine is that though the Satva, etc., 
are specifically three, they have endless modifications. This 
Sankhya Sfltra (1, 128) says, “ By the qualities of lightness, 
■etc., each quality has equality and inequality.” Although 



234 LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 

Satva, etc., are substance yet as they exist for the sake of 
Purusha, they are called qualities. 

Or, Gunas, aggregates fvydha), nidhi, nine, i.e., she has 
nine aggregates of qualities. For it is said, “ The supreme 
Lord (S'ival, the highest Bliss, • is in the form of nine 
aggregates, namely, the- aggregate of time, of family, of 
name, of knowledge, of mind, of Nada, of Bindu, of Kala, 
and of Jlva. Thus there are nine.” The commentator, 
Lolla, gives the characteristics of each in the commentary 
(on the Sau. La. S'lo. 34.) 

Or, Guna rope, the rope called Rikavati, which tied the 
ship during the pralaya ; Nidhi , the deity to whom it was 
tied. The following story occurs in the Matsya and Kalika 
Prs. thus : At the time of dissolution all seeds and Rishis 
entered the boat at the command of Manu, who was 
directed by the Lord, and the boat was tied to the horn of 
the fish-incarnation. That rope became firm when Devi 
held it. “ Make a great rope of hides to be called Rikavafi, 
nine Yojanas long and three cubits broad. Devi who is 
the protector of the universe, the great Maya, the mother 
of the world, the world itself, will make that rope firm so 
that it will not give way.” In another place : “ The 
Yoganidra, the protector of the universe held the rope.” 

605. Mother of kine. (Gomata.) 

That is the Surabhi (the divine cow). The other mean¬ 
ings of the word cow, i.e., speech, etc., should also betaken 
here. The Vikva says, “go means heaven, bull, rays, 
thunderbolt, moon, collyrium, eye, the quarters, bow. 
earth, speech, and water.” The Anekarthadhvanimanjari 
also, “ . . . mother, fire, face, truth, and path.” 

' 606. The mother of Guha. (Guhajanmabhfih.) 

Guha, Subrahmanya. ^ 

Or, Guha (lit. to cover) that which is covered, the 
Jivas veiled by Avidya ; Amba, the birthplace. The S’ruti 
(Br. Up. 2, 1, 20) says, “Just as from fire small sparks 
arise, etc.” The Yajnavalka Smr. also, “ Just as sparks 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


235 


come from the hot iron so the souls have come out from 
the Self.” (121) 

607. Ruler of gods. (Devesl.) 

Deva-s, Brahma, Vishnu, etc. 

608. Dwelling in justice. (Dandhanitistha.) 

The Devi Pr. says, “ Because she leads to certainty men 
who wander into good and bad ways by restraining and by 
soothing them, she (Devi) is called Dandanlti (justice).” 

609. The Subtle ether in the heart. (Daharaka- 
s'ardpinl.) 

The Ved. (SO., I, 3, 14), “ The small ether is Brahman 
on account of subsequent (arguments).” The STuti (Ohcha. 
Up., VIII, 1, 1), “There is in this city of Brahman the 
small lotus house and in it that small ether, that should be 
sought for.” Here the ether of the heart is said to be 
Brahman. 

610. Worshipped on the group (of fifteen days) from 

the Pratipat to the full moon. (Pratipanmukhyarakantatithi- 
mandalapOjita.) , 

The meaning is she is to be Worshipped by the modes 
laid down for the different days as described by the Tantras. 

Or, Pratipat , KSmes'varl, RaM, ChitrS deity. Tithi, 
Nitya (deities), mandala, the aggregate of these. She is 
surrounded by the three lines of the triangle. 

Of, she is worshipped by the aggregate of the Nitya 
deities of the first to fifteenth. These deities are described 
in the Varaha Pr., “ How did Agni originate and how the 
As'vins, 0 great ascetic, how Gaurl, Ganapati, Nagas, Guha, 
Sftrya, Matris, Durga, the Quarters, Kubera, Vishnu, Yama, 
the Grandsire S'iva, Pitris, the moon, 0 Muni ? How do 
these deities take form in the body ? What is their sphere 
of action, what their names, what their abode ? ’’ Thus 
questioned he explains in sixteen chapters, the origin of 
Agni and the rest as the deities of the first fifteen lunar 
days. The same is mentioned in the Kadimata also. But 
in the latter work the new-moon day is counted as the 



236 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


fifteenth day and the full-moon day as the sixteenth, but 
in the former work the full-moon is counted as the fifteenth. 
Hence the full-moon day may be taken either as the 
fifteenth or sixteenth. (122.) 

611. In the form of Kail. (KalatmikS.) 

The word Kola means the ten Kalis of fire, the twelve 
of the sun, and the sixteen of the moon ; and the other 
well-known sixty-four Kalas are also to be taken here. 
("And also,) “ In the waking state there are our Kalas, 
namely, rising, waking, thought, (Bodha) and the continu¬ 
ous mental action, thus there are four’Kalas belonging to 
the waking state. The waking state is said to be Devi 
accompanied with all qualities.” Thus “ death, oblivion, 
insensibility, and sleep abounding with darkness. These are 
the four Kalas of the sleeping state, these belong to 
S'iva.” “ Desire, confusion, anxiety and recollection of 
sense objects, these are the four Kalas, 0 Devi, that belong 
to the dreaming state. These Kalas belong to S'iva as 
well as to S'akti.” So also “ dispassion, desire of sal¬ 
vation, the mind purified by concentrated meditation 
(Samadhi) and determination of reality and unreality ; 
these are the Kalas of the Turlya state.” In the Dlltiyaga 
chapter sixteen Kamakalas are described. In the Antara 
Dfitl, chapter sixteen Kalas are attributed to the S'rlvidya. 
Also some more, such as the Kalas of Bindu, Ardhacbandra, 
Rodhini, etc., are described in the Svachchanda Bhairava 
and other works ; and all these are to be taken here. 

612. Ruler of kala. (Kalanatha.) 

The holds are above-mentioned ones. Or kalanatha 
means the moon as the moon’s disc is the S'rlchakra, she 
is in that form. 

613. Sporting in the poetical speech. (Kfivyala- 
pavinodini.) 

Kavyas are the works of Valmiki, etc., and having 
the eighteen characteristics and divided into superior 
and inferior dramas, etc. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


237 


614. Attended on either side by Lakshml and Sarasvati 

bearing ChSmaras (a kind of ceremonial fan). (Sacha- 
mararam&v&nSsavyadakshinasevita.) (123) 

615. The Primordial energy. (Adis’aktih.) 

Adi, because she is the canse of the origin of the 
universe. 

616. Immeasurable. (Ameya.) 

Or because except herself there is none to measure 
her. The Linga Pr. says, “ Heaven, Patala, the end of 
the world (etc.), in these eight coverings of the Brahmiinrfa, 
all that can be measured, is in the form of Uma, and the 
measurer is the great Lord (S'iva).” 

617. Atman. 

Atman means here the Jlva and the next name means 
the supreme Self. The Linga Pr. says, “Just as the 
different sparks are said to be in the fire, so the Jlvas 
are all in S'iva and he is the Supreme Self.” The S'iva Pr. 
also : “ The Supreme eighth body of S'iva is the Atman and 
pervades the other (seven) ; hence S'iva is the universe.” 

Or, Atman, Brahman. For it is said, “That which 
obtains, receives, enjoys the objects, and exists continu¬ 
ously is called Atman.” 

Or, Atman, body. The Vasishiha and Linga Prs. 
say, “All bodies of embodied souls are the forms of Devi, 
all embodied souls are parts of S'iva.” 

According to the Vis'va, “ Atman means body, mind, 
Brahman, nature, firmness, intelligence ” ; and other 
meanings of it also are to be taken here. (The Saptas'ati 
says), “Devi who is in all beings in the form of 
intelligence ...” 

618. The Supreme. (Parama.) 

Para, Brahman, ma, limits. Or, Para, S’iva, mil 
Lakshml. 

Or there are four forms of Pavabrahman, ma, trans¬ 
cending (these four). The Vislmu Pr. says, “ 0 twice- 
born one, the .first form of supreme Brahman is Purnsha, 



•238 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


the second is the unmanifested ; the third is manifested 
and next is time. Thus that which is higher than 
Pradhana (unmanifested), Purusha, manifested, and time 
is seen by the wise to be the pure supreme abode of 
Vishnu. The forms called Pradhana . . . etc., are the 
cause of the manifestation of the universe.” 

619. Of pure form. (Pavanakritih.) 

Akriti, may also mean her actions, or her knowledge. 
The Yajnavalka Smr. says, “Penance and knowledge 
are the means of purifying the soul (Bhfitatman), the 
knowledge purifies intellect, the Kshetrajna is said to be 
completely purified by the knowledge of the Lord.” 

620. The creator of many crores of worlds (lit. eggs 
of Brahman). (Anekakotibrahmilndajanani.) 

Or she is the mother of VirSt, etc., who are the deities 
of many crores of Brahmanrfas. Vira< is the individuality 
of Brahmanda, resulting from the combination of the 
five gross elements, consisting of sixteen modifications. 

SvariU is the individuality of the collective subtle 
forms fLingas'arlra) of BrahmSnrfa. 

Samrat is the individuality of the unmanifested which 
is the cause of these two. For it is said, “ The Vira< 
Purusha is especially thought of as the Brahman da, the 
Svarai as its nature (Lingas'arira), the Sanprai as both, 
thus S'ruti declares.” 

621. Divinely shaped. (Divyavigraha.) 

Or, Divya in the ether, vigraha, quarrel. The Mark. 
Pr. says, “ Even there (in the ether) without support 
Chandika fought with him.” 

Vigraha means according to the Medini, “ conflict, 
body, expansion, division.” (124) 

‘622. Creator of the syllable Klim. (Klimkari.) 

Klim is the Kamabija ; or she is the Klim itself ; or 
Klimkara is S'ivakama and she is his wife. 

623. The absolute. (Kevaia.) 

Because she is single as she is devoid of all attributes. 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 239 

Or, Kevala, a kind of knowledge described in a S'iva 
Sfttra (III, 35) : “ That which is freed from that is the 
absolute (Kevala).” 

Or, Kevala, completeness and fixed meaning. The 
Vis'va says, “Kevala means a department of knowledge, 
one, complete, fixed meaning, sometimes also a mouse.” 

Or, with reference to the Kamablja (i.e., .Kllrn) 
mentioned in the previous name, when the Ka and La are 
eliminated (from the Klim), Kevala means the Kamakala 
{i.e., Im) which is the Turlya state ; the S'ruti says, “He 
who hears this without Ka and La does not reach the place 
of good action.” The explanation is one who hears / alone 
without Ka and La (in the Klim) does not go to the place 
attained through action ; but obtains the world, attainable 
by unconditioned knowledge alone. The meaning is the 
three objects (Dharma, etc.) are attained by Kamabija, and 
Moksha through Kamakala alone. 

624. The secret. (G-uhya.) 

This and the following names have the same significa¬ 
tion as the previous one. 

Guhya (lit., entered the cave, i.e., she is very secret. 

625. Bestower of the solitary abode. (Kaivalya- 
padadayinl.) 

Kaivalya, the state of singleness without attributes. 
That is the fifth state (of consciousness). 

Or, Kaivalya, the five, Pada the states, Ddyint, the 
bestower. The Yoga Sfitra (IV, 33) says, “ Kaivalya is the 
establishment in its own nature of the energy of conscious¬ 
ness.” Bhojaraja, the commentator, explains that state of 
energy in which modifications are extinct and when it 
remains alone with its own nature is Kaivalya. 

Pada means the four kinds of salvation, vie.. Salokya, 
etc. (Sarttpya, Samlpya and Sayujya) ; because they are of 
the nature of fixed abodes. This is to be known here. 
The Salokya (lit. remaining with the god in the same 
world) state is to be attained by the worship of idol, etc. 



240 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


S&r’ipya (receiving the same form with the god) is the 
worship, without using images, of deities regarded as 
different from oneself and as endowed with dominion and 
of the nature of equality between the deity and the wor¬ 
shipper. Some call this (state) Sarshni, i.e., equality of 
dominion. 

Sayujya (lit. becoming one with the deity) worship¬ 
ping as himself the deity with attributes and he becomes 
one with the deity. 

Sdmipya (lit. remaining near the deity) is attained by 
those celibates who perform the duties as ordained to their 
states in life. The Tai. S'ruti-(Ohcha. Up. as 2-20-2) is 
the authority for the first three kinds of salvation. 
“ Among these deities one obtains Sayujya, Sarshni 
(Sardpya) and Salokya.” The authority for the fourth is 
the Mund. Up. (1-2-11) : “ Those who are peaceful, learned, 
who live on alms, in the forest performing penance and 
having faith, without passion, proceed through the sun to 
the place where is the immortal person, the eternal Self.” 
Hence through the sun, the path of Archis (fire, etc.. Vide 
Chcha-Up., 4-15-4. Bh. Gita, 8-24) ; they go to Satyaloka 
where Brahma, the Person is. These four kinds of salva¬ 
tion are the result of action, transitory, and conditioned. 
Hence these are described by the words Pada (abode). 
The Kaivalya salvation which is the result of knowledge 
and is unconditioned, permanent. The Tai. S'ruti says, 
“ He who knows thus and dies, when the sun is 
in the northern solstice, by obtaining the glory of the 
Devas attains the Sayujya of the sun. Next when one 
dies when the sun is in the southern solstice obtaining 
the ‘glory of the Pitris attains the Sayujya of the moon. 
These are the glory of the sun and of the moon. The learned 
man who is in Brahman, rejects these two, hence he attains 
the glory of Brahman.” Here those who perform action 
alone, attain the world of the moon ; one who observes the 
three modes of worships, images, etc., attains Salokya and 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 241 

other states. Those who know Brahman, recognising the 
worlds of the sun and the moon resulting from action and 
worship as imperfect, rejects them and attains the. glory of 
Brahman, the unconditioned bliss transcending both. The 
S'aktirahasya gives this by a short verse. “ A mortal who 
worships by ceremonies, by images, by mind, by identifica¬ 
tion, by knowing the Self, attains Kaivalya.” 

626. Older than the three. (Tripura.) 

For it is said “ Devi is called Tripura because she is 
older than the three persons (Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra).” 
The TripurSrrcava says, “ Tripura, means the three Nadls, 
Sushumna, Pingala and Ida ; and Manas, Buddhi and 
Chitta ! as Devi dwells in these she is called Tripura.” 
The Gaudapada Stltra says, “ The difference is by the three 
Tatvas.” The meaning is that the one Brahman is divided 
into three by the three Tatvas. In the commentary of the 
above, the ‘Tatvas’ are explained variously as qualities, 
forms, states of consciousness, worlds, Pifha, Blja divisions 
(of the Panchadas'l), etc. Pura, beyond these. The 
Laghustava (Slo. 16), “ There are three Devas, three Vedas, 
three fires, three energies, three notes (Svaras), three 
worlds, three abodes, (or according to another reading, 
three cities), three sacred lakes, three castes, viz., 
Brahmana, etc. Whatever in the world is threefold, 
such as the three objects of human desire, all these, 0 
divine one, really belong to your name.” Kalika Pr. also, 
“Your sphere is triangular, . . because everything is 

three-fold you are called Tripura.” 

Or, Tripura, the three feet,’ white, red and mixed. 
The Mantras belonging to these with the explanation and the 
nature of the same are set forth in the Tantras. The Pttrva 
Chatus's'ati in the fourth chapter describes from the verse, 

' In the BhSvana Dp. Prayoga of Bhaskararaya, the three feet are 
explained thus : White foot indicates the pure Samvit which is un¬ 
tainted by any Upadhis. The red foot the Parahanta (Supreme 
Egoism'), the first vritti from the Samvit. The mixed indicutes 
the above as one inseparable modification (the Vritti) of ‘ I 
31* 




242 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


“ The Supreme Energy is called Tripura,” ending with the 
verse “ Hence she is called Tripura ” and we are going to 
explain in more details in its commentary. 

627. Adored by the three worlds. (Trijagadvandya.) 

628. Triple-formed. (TrimOrtih.) 

According to Dhaumya a girl, three years old, is 
called Trimttrti. 

Or, TrimUrti signifies Brahma, etc., the three S'aktis, 
Varna, etc., and of Ichcha, etc. The Yaraha Pr. says, 
“ Thus having spoken Brahma looked at Siva and also 
called to mind Narayana. Then the divine Narayana 
stood between the two. They became Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Siva and with subtle vision regarded each other 
delighted. Then a threefold vision appeared to them ; from 
that sight, sprang a young girl of divine form . . . seeing 
that girl, Brahma, Vishnu and S'iva addressed her saying, 
who are you ? What are you doing, 0 smiling one ? Thus 
questioned, that girl of three colours, viz., black, white, and 
red, replied, 0 best ones, do you not know me, your own 
Sakti, supreme dominion, of beautiful shape, born from 
your gaze . . . then the triad, Brahma, etc., were pleased 

and they granted her boons. Your name is the triple Devi, 
ever protect the world, 0 sinless one, you will have many 
other names derived from your qualities, effecting all 
objects . . . Hear from us, 0 Devi, another thing. Make 

your body threefold according to the three colours yon 
. possess, white, red and black. Devi thus addressed by the 
gods made her body threefold. Thus she assumed three 
forms, white, red and black.” In another place also is 
described the penance of the three S'aktis, Brahma, Vishnu 
and Rudra, respectively, in the white, red and blue 
mountains. Again in another place the forms are explained. 
“The supreme energy endowed with the Satvic quality, 
remaining with Brahma becomes white ; the same endowed 
with the Rajasic quality and remaining with Vishnu 
becomes red ; the same endowed with Tamasic quality and 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


243 


remaining with Rudra is said to be black. Just as the 
supreme Self though one, becomes three the one S'akti, 
becomes three in order to produce effects.” The Gau. Pa. 
SO. (2) says, “ (One becomes) Sambhavi, Vidya and 
Syama.” The De. Bhag. Pr, also, “ The S'ambhavi is 
white hued, S'rlvidyS red, and the S'yama black.. Thus the 
S'aktis are of the three qualities.” 

629. Ruler of the thrice-ten. (Tridas'esvari.) 

Tridams are the devas ; Tri , three, dam states, or ten, 
i.e., thirteen. Or, Tridams Vis'vedevas ; or triple ten, i.e., 
she is the ruler of the thirty-three ganas of gods (of course 
three is Understood). (125) 

-630. Three syllabled. (Tryaksharl.) 

The Syllables are the Bljas of the three divisions (of 
the Panchadas'l), namely, Vagbhava, KamarAja and S'akti. 
The Vamakes'vara Tr. says, ‘ ‘ Yagis'var! is the JnSna S'akti 
which is in the VAghbava division and confers Salvation. 
KAmarAja is the Kriya S'akti, the ruler of desires and fulfils 
desire. The S'aktidivision is the Ichcha S'akti, the supreme 
energy and is in the form of S'.iva. Thus Devi, the great 
Tripurasundarl, is three-syllabled.” 

Or, Tryaksharl, means S'uddhavidyA and Kumari 
mantras. The Crau. Pa. SO. (69 and 70), " The S'uddhavidyA 
and KumAri are three-syllabled.” 

Or, Tryaksharl (Hridaya and Satya) heart, or truth. 
The Br. Up. (5-3-1 and 5-5-1 says, “ The words heart and 
truth are each tkree-syllabed.” 

Or, Tryaksharl, the three divisions of the alphabet 
called, YugAkshara, MAsakshara and Nityakshara. 

24th verse divides 35 names. 

631. Endowed with the divine perfume. (Divyagan- 
dhadhyA.) 

Diuya, the divine beings such as gods and other 
animated beings, i.e.. She is surrounded by celestial things 
and not like the (ordinary) kings who surround themselves 
with terrestrial objects. 



244 


LALITA 8AHASRANAMA 


Or, Bivyagandha, the perfumes, Hariehandana, 
etc. For the S'ruti (Tai. Ar., X, 10, says, “ Devi possesses 
perfumes and is not to be easily perceived.” 

According to the Yoga Sutra (3-41), “ From concen¬ 
tration with reference to the t elation between the organ of 
hearing and ether, a super-perfect organ of hearing.” 
Similarly with other senses. It is by the favour of Devr 
one obtains the divine perfumes, etc. 

632. Decorated with a red forehead mark. (Sindfl- 
ratilakanchita.) 

According to Vis'va Sindiira means elephant, tilaka she 
elephant, anjitS worshipped ; or worshipped by females 
whose gait resembles that of an elephant. The Vi. .Bhag. 
Pr. says, ‘‘The daughters of Nanda (the cowherd) whose 
love’is intense and hard to resist ... 0 Katykyani, O 

great Maya, 0 great YoginI, 0 ruler, 0 Devi, the son of 
the cowherd (Krishna), give us a husband. We adore thee. 
Thus repeating the mantra the girls worshipped Devi, etc. 
Rukminl also at her marriage said, when Krishna's arrival 
was delayed, “ Fortune, is against me, Mahes’vara is against 
me. Devi, also, the wife of Siva, the daughter of the mount¬ 
ain, is unfavourable . . . Thus the girl protected by servants 
left the female apartments for the Devi’s temple on foot to 
gaze on the tender feet of Devi ... by worshipping Devr 
she obtained her desired objects.” 

633. UmS. 

U, S'iva, Ms, Lakshml, or U, Siva MS, limits. Or, UmS 
rose colour, also saffr.on colour, fame, brightness. For it is 
said (Mark. Pr.), ‘‘Devi who resides as brightness in all 
creatures.” The Visva, “ UmS, means china rose, daughter 
of Himavat Mountain, saffron, fame, and brightness.” 

Or, U, note of interrogation, MS, negation : when the 
Devi was performing penance she was forbidden by her 
mother. The Kalika Pr. says, “ Because when she was 
forbidden to go to the forest to perform penance she was 
called Uma (not to go).” The same story is repeated 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


245 


in the Brahma Pr. and in Pushkara Khanda of the 
Padma. Pr. 

Or, U, Superior, Ma, a certain mental modification. The 
Stt Sam. (4-1-20), says, “ I adore the supreme experience 
which destroys the noose of earthly existence, which purifies 
even Sadas'iva, called UmS, which produces the bright 
mental state and manifests in many kinds of worlds.” 

Or Umd : 17, Ma and A which forms Pranava meaning 
respectively, Brahma, Rudra and Vishnu ; and many other 
meanings of Pranava also are. to be taken here. Therefore 
those who know the secret call this (Uma) Devi pranava. In 
Linga Pr. Siva says to Devi, ‘ ‘ In my Pranava there are A~ 
U-Ma, and IJ-Ma-and A are in the order in your Pranava, 
with the three notes (MatrasJ and with, the highest pluta.” 
The Mahavasistda says, “ Uma is so called because it con¬ 
tains the essence of the Pranava”; again “ Uma is the 
Indukala which ever inspires the hearts of all beings in the 
three worlds asleep and awake.” In the commentary it is 
explained thus ;—“ In the heart of all beings, whether 
asleep or awake there is a cavity whence arises the sound 
being produced without contrast which is S'abdabrahman, 
the Pranava, without the letters A, etc. The cavity is S'iva, 
and in his head there is a Indukala, which is in the form 
of Efindu.” The Vayavlya Sam. also, “ Om is the mono- 
syllabled Brahman . ■. • . in the head of Linga is to be 
heard the sound that has half-an-accent.” The Hamsa. Up. 
(verse 8) describing the different things situated in the 
petals of the lotus of the heart, says, “ In the Linga sleep 
(arises) ; when the lotus is left the Turlya state (arises) ; 
and when the Hamsa (Jlva) is absorbed in the N5da which 
is at the head of Linga, the state beyond the fourth arises.” 1 

According to the S^iva Sfltra, (I, 13) Uma means the 
Ichcha Sfakti of Yogins. “ The young Urn a is called the 


1 Naravaua, the commentator, on the above Up. explains, Linga 
means the Puritat Nadi. ‘ When the lotus is left ’ means gone to 
Niralamba place which is above the lotns. 




246 


LAMTA 8AHA8RANAMA 


Ichcha S'akti.” The commentator, Krishnadfisa explains 
thus : “ The energy of the Yogin who grasps the Para- 
bhairava, as described above, which is the eternal energy of 
desire, which we wise call TJmQ," 

According to Padma Pr. UmS is the deity worshipped 
at the Vinayaka and at the S'indhuvana. Or, according to 
Dhaumya, a girl of six years of age is called Uma. 

634. Daughter of the king of mountains. (S’ailendra- 
tanayaj 

The Devi Pr. says, “ Being born in the abode of the 
king of mountains, she is called the daughter of the king of 
the mountains.” 

635. Gauri. a 

Because her colour is yellowish. The Maha Vasishta, 

“ She is called Gauri because her body is yellow.” 

According to Padma Pr. Gauri is the wife of Varuwa. 

According to a Eos's, Gauri means a certain river, a 
girl of ten years of age. The Devi Pr., " She who was 
burned by the fire of Yoga, was again born of Himalaya, as 
she has the colour of the conch, jasamine and the moon, 
she is called Gauri.” According to the Padma Pr. Gauri is 
the deity at Kanyakubja. 

636. Attended by the Gandharvas. (Gandharva sevita.) 

Ohandharva, Vis'vavasu, and others, or horses, or a 

certain deity called As'varOrfha ; or it may mean a celestial 
song. (126) 

637. Whose womb contains the Universe. (Vis'va- 
garbha.) 

638. Born from a golden (egg). (Svarnagarbha.) 

Or, whose womb is golden. The Vayu Pr. says, “ Her 
womb is golden and born from gold, hence she is called 
Hiranyagarbha.” Or, su, excellently, arna, letters, garbha, 
shining, i.e., she. is explained by the Matrika letters. 

Or, su, superior, ama. Mantras, garbha,, in the womb, 
i.e., she has ail higher mantras in her womb. 

639. Punisher of unholy (persons). (Avarada.) 



LAL1TA SAHASEANAMA 


247 


Aoartut, unholy Asuras. Or, ava, shining, radn, teeth. 

640. Ruler of speech. (Vagadhlstearl.) 

641. To be attained by meditation. (Dhyanagamya.) 

The S'ruti CS've. Up., 1-3), “ They (the sages) devoted 

to meditation, sa-w the S'aVti of the divine Self hidden by 
its own qualities.” 

642. Unlimited. (Aparichchedya.) 

That is as to place and time. 

643. Bestower of knowledge. fJnanada.) 

The Rena Up. (25) says, “ In that ether he met a very 
beautiful woman, Uma, the daughter of Himavat; to her 
he (Indra) said, what is this Yaksha ? she replied, that is 
Brahman.” The Stl. Sam. (4-47-58), “ Such is the supreme 
Vidya Sankarl, destroyer of Samsara, arises in men by the 
grace of S’akti alone.” In another place also (SOtagita 8-80), 
“ She who is in the form of Vidya, to be known by the 
Vedas, is existence, bliss, infinity, and knowledge, by the 
grace of that speech, Ambika, the one mother of the 
Universe (one obtains salvation) through devotion.” 

Or jnana, the knowledge which leads to the bondage, 
da, the slayer (the remover). The Siva Stltra (I, 2) says, 
“ Jnana is bondage ” some commentators say jnana in this 
S’Qtra should be taken as Ajnana. The Vartika com¬ 
ments on this thus : “ This knowledge, which possessing 
the modifications of the feeling inwardly, of joy, etc., tends 
outwardly towards the sensual objects, and makes (always) 
duality to a man, is called ‘ bondage ’. As she is bound 
by this bondage he is for ever in the Samsara.” Another 
Stltra (II, 9) says, “knowledge is food.” The Vartika 
explains it thus, “ It is explained, knowledge is called 
bondage in the previous (Stltra). One who is attached 
towards this, he sees Atman in the things that are not 
Atman, hence it is called food (because it is perishable).” 
“ 644. Whose body is knowledge. (Jnanavigraha.) 

Because the whole world is the form of knowledge. 
The Vishnu Pr. (Book II) : “ Jnana alone is the supreme 



LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


Brahman, Jnftna is the cause of bondage. This universe 
consists of knowledge. There is nothing beyond know¬ 
ledge. 0 Maitreya, know that Jnana is both Vidya and 
Avidya.” 

Or Jn&na, knowledge, vigraha, expansion, i.e., 
through her one’s knowledge expands. (127) 

645. To be known through all the Vedantas. (Sarva • 
vedanta samvedya.) 

The Varaha Pr. says, “ This (Devi) is explained as the 
threefold energy and set forth as the end of logic. She is 
the energy of wisdom, set forth in all the Vedantas.” 

646. Who is existence and bliss. (Satyanandasva- 
rflpinl.) 

Some di vide this name into two, as ‘ Satya ’ and 
‘ Anandasvarflpini’. The S'ruti (Tai. Up., 2—6—1) : (He 
became) Sat as well as Tyat. “ Or Sat Prana, food, etc. 
The S'ruti says, sat. Prana and food ; ya, the sun.” Or 
Satya, she is good to the wise, or sat means brightness. 

Anandasvariipinl : In the Ved. Sfktra (III, 3—11) 
“ Bliss and other qualities as belonging to the subject 
(Brahman),” it is. explained that the qualities, bliss, etc., 
are the qualities of Brahman itself. 

647. Worshipped by Lopamudra. (Lopamudrarchita.) 

Lopamudra is the wife of Agastya. 

The Trisati (I, 15) says, “ His wife named Lopamudra 
worships me with much devotion.” The Tripura Siddhanta 
also, “ As the supreme ruler was pleased with the wife of 
Agastya, named Lopamudra, this Devi is involved under 
the name of Lopamudra.” 

. , Or, Lopamudra, the Panchadasl mantra (vide name 
238) and archita, worshipped ; or through the Lopamudra 
mantra she is to be worshipped. The Kadimata says, 
“ One should perform all the ceremonies by the third 
division of the mantra.” 1 * 

' Bh. Nara. Lopa, by the absence of worship, mud, bliss, ra, is 
taken away. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


249 


648. Who formed the world systems as it were in 
sport. (Lllftkliptabrahm3ndamandala.) 

That is without effort. We said in our Devlstava. 
“ Even Siva is powerless to create, preserve or destroy 
Brahma, Vishnu and other gods, but, 0 mother, the regula¬ 
tion of the universe is but sport to you.” The S'akti 
(Stttra), “She manifests the Universe at will in herself.” 

(128) 

649. Invisible. (Adrisya.) 

Not to be perceived by eyes and other senses. The 
S'ruti (Br. Up., 3-4-2), “You do not see the seer of sight.” 
The De. Bhag. Pr. (Book III) : “ Your unqualified form is 
not *an object of visual perception . . . S'akti is. 
without quality, difficult of approach. The Supreme- 
Person also is without qualities.” 

650. Transcending the visible. (Drisyarahita.) 

Or, she is freed from Dris'ya, the wordly things 
because they are not eternal. 

651. Perceiver. (Vijnatrl.) 

The S'ruti (Br. Up., 2-4-14), “ O, how is the knower to 
be known.” 

652. Transcending the knowable. (Vedyavarjita.) 

Because they are not eternal. 

653. Yoginl. 

Yoga is the idea of union. As she has this and 
bestows it on others she is so called. 

654. Bestower of Yoga. (Yogada.) 

655. Yogya. 

The meaning of the Yoga is given in the Vishnu Pr. : 
“ Having controlled all the senses with the mind, the idea 
of unity of the soul with the supreme Self is Yoga.” The 
Bh. Gita (6-23) : “One should know that Yoga which frees 
from the attachment of the pain.” The Yoga Stttra (1-2), 
$“Yoga means the restraint of mental modifications.” 
That (Yoga) is of four kinds. Mantra, Lava, Hatha and 
Raja. The Rajayoga is also of three kinds, Sankhvn, 



250 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Taraka and Amanaska. The characteristics of these are 
omitted here for want of space. 

Or, yoginl, the eight Yoginis (planets') from Mangala 
to Sankaia ; according ,to the Jyotis S'astra, they make a 
round in thirty-six years. 1 

Or, yoginis, are the seven deities, Z)akini and others 
mentioned in the Mantra S'astra. (See the com. under 
name 475.) 

Or Yoga means (lit.) enjoyment of objects, hence of 
three names (653—655), the first is enjoyer, the second, 
the bestower of enjoyment, and the third; the object of the 
enjoyment. The S've. Up. (1—12) says, “ Having known the 
enjoyer, the object of the enjoyment and the bestower of the 
enjoyment as Brahman . . .” This is to be known here. The 
Sankhyas say the primordial Maya is independent, the 
Vedantins say, that is the energy of S'iva ; Vivaranacharyas 
say, that energy implies dependence; that (energy) 
possesses the three qualities and the qualities mutually 
exclude one another. For the Bh. Gita (14—10) says, “ O 
Bharata when Rajas and Tamas are excluded Satva remains. 
When Satva and Tamas are excluded Rajas remains ; when 
Rajas and Satva are excluded Tamas remains.” Hence 
that (energy) is established as triple. When Rajas and 
Tamas are entirely excluded that (energy) becomes pure 
Satva alone. When Satva is tainted by Rajas and Tamas, 
the secondary Satva appears. When Satva and Rajas are 
completely excluded by Tamas the third state (Satva) 
appears ; of these the first called Is’vari, is meant by the 
name bestower of enjoyment (654). The energy possessed 
with the second (Rajas) called jlva, in the enjoyer and 
expressed by the word Yoginl (653). The same possessed 
with the third (Tamas) called the material universe 
(Jadavastu) is expressed by the word Yogya. Thus they 
Should be distinguished. 0 

656. Bliss of Yoga. (Yogananda.) 

1 The Bombay Edition says twenty-six years. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


25 ? 


Yoga, the common essence of S'iva and S'akti; that 
alone is her bliss. 

Or, Yogananda is called Yoga sleep, because bliss 
chiefly pervades in sleep. That state belongs to Devi. The 
Harivamste says, “ She who is a mass of bliss and is known 
in the world as sleep . . . Even among the gods none 

supported her except Narayana. She is the companion of 
Sadasdva, Maya, the mother of Vishnu, unborn ; She is 
ever in the presence of Narayana (thus causing him to 
sleep), the lotus-eyed ; she attends people for a short time, 
and greatly confuses (them).” 

Or, Yogaruinda means Nrisimha (man-lion) of that 
name. 

According to some this name should be divided into 
two, viz., Ayoga and Nanda. Ayoga, without attachment. 
The S'ruti (Br. Up., 3-9-26), “The unattached is never 
attached.” Or, she is aya, mountain, i.e., immovable like 
a mountain. Or, aya, good actions, u, S'iva, ga ,to go (i.e., 
she leads one to S'iva by good actions). 

Nanda, the Ganga by name Alakananda. Or, Nanda, 
the deity of the first, sixth and eleventh days fof lunar 
fortnights). 

According to the Mark. Pr. Nanda means a certain 
incarnation of Devi, who was born as the daughter of the 
shepherd Nanda. Or the river Sarasvatl is called Nanda 
in a certain place. For the Padma Pr. says, “ (Sarasvatl) 
is called Nanda at the foot of the Himavat mountain ” ; or 
Nanda is a certain river which flows near the Pushkara(lake). 
The Padma Pr. Pushkara Khanda says, ‘ ‘ Even one who does 
not g6 to the river called Nanda, the daughter of Brahma, 
having clear and turbid waters, broad, flowing to the south, 
if he merely repeat its name, he will obtain happiness 
while living and will move in the ether after death.” The 
0 Varaha Pr. gives definition of the name thus : “ Having 
established Devi in the Himavat Mountain, the Devas 
returned as they came. As she was joyful after the 



LALJ 


SAHASRANAMA 


establishment she was called Nanda (joyous).” The Devi 
Pr., “ She rejoices (Nanda) in the heaven or resides in the 
Nandana (celestial) garden, or in the holy Himavat 
Mountain, hence she is called Nanda.” The Vftraha Pr. 
sets forth the nature of that deity. “ Gayatrl with eight 
arms who fought with the Daitya, Chaitra, she herself 
became • Nanda in order to accomplish the actions of the 
Devas ; and she who, in the Svayambhuva cycle, killed 
in the Mandara Mountain, the Daitya, Mahisha, who after¬ 
wards became the Daitya Chaitra, the very strong and 
powerful one who was slain by Nanda in the Vindhya 
Mountain. That Devi is Jnanas'akti. Mahisha is in the 
form of Ajnana. AjnSna is always dispelled by JnSna.” 

657. Bearer of the yoke. (Yugandhara.) 

According to the Vis'vaprakSs'a “Yuga means a 

measure consisting of four cubits, chariot yoke, a plough, 
also the cycles Krita, etc., a pair, and a species of medicinal 
plant.” The meaning is as the horse, bull, etc., bear the 
yoke, she supports the whole universe. The pair refers to 
Siva and S'akti. ‘ The Krita, etc.’ (cycles), she directs the 
cycles. (129) 

658. The energies of desire, wisdom, and action. 
(Ichchas'akti jnanas'akti kriyas'akti-svarOpinl.) 

These correspond to the three qualities. The Sanketa 
paddhati says, “ Desire is her head, wisdom her trunk, 
action her feet, thus her body consists of three energies.” 
The Vftmakes'vara Tr. also, “ Tripura is threefold, viz., 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Ika and she, 0 beloved one, is the 
energies of desire, wisdom and action.” Of these energies 
the.preceding one is the cause of the succeeding. 

The Kriyas'akti is fivefold according to the So. Sam. 
(4-14-28) namely, “ Spanda, Parispanda, Prakrama, 
Parisllata, and Parachara, thus there are five actions.” The 
Malinlvijaya Tr. says, “ That supreme divine energy be-(3 
comes the energy of desire when Brahman, the supporter of 
the universe, wishes to create. This should be known thus 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


253 


and in no other way. She becomes the energy of know¬ 
ledge when she reminds him saying ‘ let this be thus.’ 
When thus knowing he acts, she becomes the energy of 
actions.” The Vasishfha also repeats the same. 

659. Supporter of all. (Sarvadhilra.) 

SarvCt, the whole worlds, Dhar/X, gradation, i.e.. She 
is one with created things. 

SarvOdh&ra : sarva the whole, adhara, support, i.e., 
she is in all. The Mark. Pr. says, “ In reality it is Devi 
herself who is perceived in all things, permanent or 
impermanent, gross or subtle or more Subtle, embodied or 
dis-embodied, one or many, in earth, in the heaven or 
elsewhere.” 

660. Firmly established. (Supratishta.) 

Supratishtha is a metre of twenty syllables. 

661. The foundation of being and non-being. (Sada- 
satrtlpadharinl.) 

Sat, Brahman, amt, universe which is different from 
sat. Though the universe, which is very difficult to define 
fone way or other) as sat or asat (Anirvachanlya) she is 
different both from the Sat and Asat; yet here the word 
asat represents the universe. For the S'ruti (Tai. Up. 
2-7-1) : “ In the beginning this was indeed asat.” Another 
S'ruti (Ohcha. Up., 6-2-2), “How did sat come to exist 
from asat.” In these places asat means the universe. 

Or, sat and asat are the two kinds of knowledge ; sat 
is the last mental modification (before the realisation of 
unity) ; Asat, the remaining mental modifications called 
Vikalpa (fanciful). For the Yoga Stltra (1-9) says, “ Fancy 
is a notion founded on a knowledge conveyed by words, 
but of that there is no object (corresponding in reality).” 
The Gaut. stltra (14-1-50), “ Whatever is perceived by the 
mind is Asat (impermanent).” 

$1 Sat and asat may mean existence and non-existence. 
Existence is what is permanent and unchangeable. The 
Stl. Sam. (4-12-16), “ Whatever appears either as existent 



254 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


or non-existent all is caused by the Maya of Maha- 
deva.” (130) 

662. Eight formed. (Ashtemfirtih.) 

The Matsya Pr. says, “Wealth, intelligence, earth, 
nourishment, gaurl, contentment, radiance, stability, 
protect me, 0 Sarasvatl, by these eight forms.” 

Or, her eight forms are to be known by mantras. The 
Yoga S'astra says, “ The Self is of eight kinds according to 
the difference of qualities, viz., embodied soul (Jlvatman), 
inner Self (AntarStman), supreme Self (Paramatman), 
unstained Self (Nirmalatman), pure Self (Siuddatman), 
wisdom Self (Jnanatman), great Self (Mahatman), and 
elemental Self (BhOtatman). Thus there are eight Selves.” 

Or the five elements : the sun, moon, and Jlva, or 
heaven or sacrificer ; these are eight bodies. The S'abti- 
rahasya says, “The five elements sun, moon and heaven 
(are the eight bodies).” The Vishnu Pr. also : “ The Sun, 
water, earth, fire, air, ether, the Brahmana the sacrificer 
and the moon, these are the eight bodies. The wives of 
these eight are respectively, UmS, Sukesi, Apara, Siva, 
Svaha, Diti, DIksha, and Rohini. Their sons are respec¬ 
tively Saturn, Venus, Lohitanga, Manojava, Skanda, 
Svarga, Santana, and Budha.” But the Linga Pr. .says, 

“ The eight Prakritis are said to form the body of Devi, 
also the (eight kinds) of products (vikritis) are manifesta¬ 
tions of her body in order to mould the bodies.’’ According 
to the Bh. Gita (7-4), “ Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, 
intellect, and egoism thus eightfold my Prakriti.” 

The eight Kulas (i.e ., eight kinds of women). The 
Samayachara Smr. says, “ Ganika, Saundika, KaivartI, 
Rajaki. Takrakarl, Karmarl, Matangl, and Pumschall.” 

In the Rudrayamala the characteristics of the following 
eight women are given, namely, " Anangakusuma, who has 
symmetrical limbs and long hair.” The name of eadjt) 
woman is given in the third chapter of the same book. 
The eight forms may mean the eight Vas’inis, Brahml, etc. 



LALITA 8AHASBANAMA 


255 


663. The conqueror of the unborn (avidya). (Ajajaitrl.) 

TheSfruti (S"ve. Up., 4-5), “ Aja the one, red, -white and 

black . . The meaning is as she is wisdom she 

destroys ignorance. 

664. Directing the course of the worlds. (Lokayatra- 
vidhayin!,) 

Lohm, the foarteen worlds, Tcitra, destruction or 
protection. 

665. One. (Ekakinl.) 

Because she is without a second. The Br. Up. (I, 4 
—2) : “ He. feared therefore any one who is lonely fears. 
He thought why should I fear, since, there is none beside 
me, thence his fear passed away.” The Devi Pr. : “ Alone 
she consumes the worlds, alone she established them, alone 
she creates the universe, hence she is called the one.” 

25th verse divides 34 names. 

666. Aggregate of all existing things. (Bhtlmartlpa). 

The Vedanta Sfltra (1-3-8) establishes that BhatnH 

means Brahman. This is described in the Cheha. (Up. 
VII, 23), “ Where one does not see anything else, nor hears 
anything else . . . that which is infinite (Bhttman) is 

bliss.” 

Or the previous name means ‘ She is one,’ but this, 
‘she is many’. The Devi Pr. says, “ Though she is one 
by limitations she is everywhere cognised as many 
(Bhtlma). As the crystal is coloured by the transmission 
of different colours so by the qualities Devi is described as 
Bhuma. Just as one cloud becomes many retaining the 
same nature and colours, so UmS (becomes many) through 
the qualities. Just as the rain from the sky assumes various 
tastes according to the soil, so UmS is through the qualities. 
Just as the wind which is one takes on different odours, 
fragrant and otherwise, so UmS through the qualities. Just 
Its the one Garhapatya fire takes different names such as 
Dakshina and Ahavanlya fires, so Devi is said by the wise 
to be one and many. Hence supreme devotion to her 



256 


LAL1TA 8AHASRANAMA 


should be practised for the attainment of all objects.” 
The Kfirma Pr. also says, “ The one energy, the wife of 
Kama becomes many through limitation. In his pre¬ 
sence she disports herself through limitations in many 
forms.” 

667. Without duality. (Nirdvaita.) 

The S’ruti (Chcha. Up., VII, 23) says, “ When he sees 
nothing else . . . which is small, that is perishable,” 

thus the S'ruti sets forth the impermanence of duality. 

668. Transcending duality. (Dvaitavarjita.) 

This refutes the theory that at any time duality is 
permanent. (131) 

669. Giver of food. (Annada.) 

670. Giver of wealth. (Vasuda.) O 

The Br. Up. (4-4-24) : “ This indeed is the great 
unborn Self, the giver of food and giver of wealth. He 
who knows this obtains food and wealth.” 

671. Ancient. (Vriddha.) 

The S'ruti (S've. Up., 4-3) : “Thou, as an old man 
totterest along on thy staff.” Vriddha may mean the oldest 
of all, or expanded in the form of the Universe ; or she 
nourishes the world. 

672. The union of Brahman and Atman. (Brahmat- 
maikyasvartipini.) 

Or, Brahma , Siva, Atma, Jiva, Sva, the Hamsa 
Mantra, which unites the souls with S'iva ; rupa, is her 
form. The Stt. Sam. (IV-7-9 to 12) : “ Or this is Jiva 
Mantra, and describes the embodied soul, for the word 
“I” is meant Jiva. The S'akti Mantra is called Sa and 
indicates the supreme Lord. For Parames'vara is known to 
be in every object. From the greatest to the smallest the 
whole universe animate and inanimate is born, lives and 
dies in the supreme Lord. The Jiva (Hamsa) who manifests 
through earthly existence is also the suprefne Lord. D 
(Brahma) also am he, there is no doubt, on the authority 
of my own experience.” 



LALITA. SAHASRANAMA 


257 


Similarly the Hamsa Mantra which occurs in the 
Trisatl (173) is to be taken as explained. 

673. Great. (Brihati.) 

Or, Brihati is a certain metre of thirty-six syllables. 
This does not contradict the word of the Kftrma Pr., “ Thou 
art the Gayatrl among the metres,” because Devi is both 
the metres. Hence there is no contradiction between the 
saying in the Bh. Gita (10-35), “ I am BrihatsSma among 
the Samans,” and in the Kftrma Pr. “1 am Jyeshdha 
Sama among the Samansi” The Brihatsaman is what is 
praised in the Rig beginning Satvannah, etc. The JyeshOia- 
saman is what is praised in the two Rigs, “ Udityam, and 
Chi tram.” 

674. f^ahmanl. 

According to the Vis'va “ BrahmanI means harlot, a 
Brahmin’s wife, and a certain medicinal plant. ” Or wisdom ; 
the Samayftchara Paddhati says, “ BrahmanI means divine 
wisdom crowned with the white flower (Satva.)” 

Br&hmani is the wife of Siva, because Siva belongs to 
the Brahmana caste. The Chcha. Up. (8-14-1), “ Thou art 
Brahmana among the Devas, I am the Brahmana among 
men (he who thinks thus) attains Brahman.” The Paras'ara, 
Aditya, Kftrma, Vasishttia and Linga Prs. also confirm 
this : “ The divine S'ambhu the consort of Devi, is 
Brahmana and is the deity of Brahmanas. A Brahmana 
especially should take refuge in Rudra, the Lord.” The 
Slvatatvaviveka also says quoting a verse from the Yi. 
Bhag. Pr. ‘‘My womb. . .” Siva is proved to be a 

Brahmana.” 

675. BrahmI. 

The female counterpart of Brahman, or speech. 

676. Bliss of Brahman. (Brahmananda.) 

(The unconditioned) Brahman is itself bliss to the con- 
sditioned one; or she is the possessor of the bliss of 
Brahman. 

677. Delighting in the mighty. (Balipriyft.) 



258 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Bali, those who are able to overcome nescience, etc., 
and conquer the enemies, viz., desire, etc. ; Priy&, fit 
objects of grace. Or Bali, the king called Bali and refers 
to the Vilmana (dwarf) incarnation. Or, Bali, accessories 
of ceremonial worship. (132) 

678. Language. (BhasharOpa.) 

That is Sanskrit, Prakrit and other languages. Or she 
is adored in different languages. For it is said, “ Some 
praise you in Sanskrit, some in foreign (Mlechcha) lan¬ 
guages, others in the vulgar fbngue, and some others in 
Prakrita.” 1 

679. With mighty army. (Brihatsena.J 

Brihatsena, is also the name of a certain king. 

680. Devoid of existence and non-existence. (Bhava- 
bhavavivarjita.) 

Bhava, substance, quality, etc., Abh&va is antecedent 
non-existence, etc., (one of the four kinds of non¬ 
existences). As Abh&va is non-existence it may be said 
that Devi cannot be said to be devoid of it. But the holy 
Vyasa answers this objection in the SO. Sam. (4-2-8 and 9), 
“ Destruction of artificial (or imagined) things means their 
substratum alone remains. For destruction is the non¬ 
existence of the existent, and the existence of the non¬ 
existent. The substratum is different from these two, viz., 
existence and non-existence. The substratum is not 
destroyed because it is ever real.” 

681. Easily worshipped. (Sukharadhya.) 

Sukha, without bodily pain by fasting, etc., and 
without restrictions on the mode of meditation, etc. In 
the. Kflrma Pr. Lord says to Himavat, “ If you are unable 
to meditate on my eternal supreme form . . .” and 
describes an easy mode of worship. 

682. Doing good. (S'ubhakarl.) 

That is even to him who but imperfectly worships her.* 

• Bh. Nara. Bhashas are Laukika, Vaidika, Prakrita, Magadha, 
Sfaurasenl, Paisacha, Dravida, Gaada, etc. 



LAL1TA SAHASKANAMA 


259 


683. The right path and easily attained. (Sobhana 
sulabhagatih.) 

ffobhann, Salvation, etc., Sulabha, easy modes of 
worship, Gati, result or means. The Yis'va says, “ Gati 
means road, state, knowledge, journey, and means.” The 
Kflrma Pr. says, “ She alone is the highest goal (gati) of 
the movements of all creatures.” 

Some divide this into two names, viz., “ the auspicious 
path ” (SobhanAgati) and ‘ easy path ’ (Sulabhagati) to 
avoid the repetition of th$ word S'obhana (of 462). Some 
take the second name as ‘ not easily attainable ’ because 
there is no return from that state which puts an end to 
birth. The Brahma, Pr. says. (Trisati 112) “ The fifteen- 
syllabled Mantra is to be attained by him alone whose 
present birth is his last, or by Sankara himself/’ 

Or, Asnlabhagati, the attainment of human birth, etc., 
which are very difficult to get, and S'obfiana, these become 
good by worshipping Devi. The De. Bhag. Pr. says, “The 
births are in vain of those men who do not listen to the 
Bhagavata, those who do not worship the ancient Prabriti 
(Devi) and who do not feed the terrestrial gods.” The Yi. 
Bhag. Pr. also in the second part adds “the ancient 
Person.” Some read 462 and 463 as one, divide this 
into three as, S'obhana, Sulabha and Gatih. (133) 

684. Ruler of the king of kings. (Rajarajes’varl.) 

Baja, Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, etc., who are the king of 

the Devas, etc. Or Rajaraja is Kubera (the god of 
wealth). 

685. Bestower of dominion. (Rajyadayinl.) 

Rajya, dominion over Vaikunfha, Kailasa, etc. 

686. Delighting in dominion. (Rajyavallabha.) 

Or, Rajya, the rulers of the above ; because their 
(Brahma, etc.), abode is said to be in the S'rlchakra. The 
LalitSstavaratna (S'lo. 49) : “ Between the thirteenth and 
fourteenth walls there are lakes of sapphire. We adore 
the protectors of that region with their wives.” 



LALITA SAHASEANAMA 


o 


687. Radiating compassion. (Rajatkripa.) 

688. Her dependants are established in thrones. 
(Raj apithan i veSi tan i jas'r ita.) 

That is Indra’s and other thrones. (134) 

689. Royal wealth. (Rajyalakshmih.) 

The Mantra of Rajyalakshmi is described in the 
Tantraraja. 

690. Mistress of the treasure. (Kosanatha.) 

Kos'a may mean the five sheaths, vis. (Annamaya, 
etc). 0 

691. Ruler of the armies. (Chaturangabales'vari.) 

Chaturanga, armies consisting of cavalry, elephants, 

chariots and infantry ; or the four kinds of military arrays. 

Chaturangabala may mean the four Vyflhas (aggre¬ 
gates.) They are according to the Yaishnavas, Vasudeva, 
etc. ; to the Saivas and Saktas these mean their respective 
four Vyflhas. 

According to the Bahvricha Up. it means the Person in 
the body, the Person in the metre, the Person in the Veda 
and the Great Person. 

692. Bestower of Samrajya. (Samrajyadayinl.) 

Samrajya, a state of a king who performs the Rajasttya 

sacrifice, or a king of the earth, or the king of kings. It 
is said in the Agni Pr. and in the Kosfcs, “ He who has 
performed the Rajasttya sacrifice, one who is the lord of 
the earth and who rules over kings is called SamraJ.” 

693. Devoted to truth. (Satyasandha.) 

694. Girdled by ocean. (Sttgaramekhala.) (135) 

695. Initiated. (Dikshita.) 

Dl, wisdom, kshi, to give. The Atharva Brahmana 
says, “ Next, therefore Dlksha, from which root Dikshita 
is derived . . . They call the man who is initiated 

Dikshita.' 1 ' 1 

Or Dikshita : she destroys the sin of her disciples by 
imparting the mantra. The Parananda Tr. says, “Out 
of compassion she imparts (dlyate) to her disciples 



lalita sahasranama 


261 


(consequently) she destroys (kshlyate) their sins ; hence 
she is called Dlkshita.” 

696. Controller of Daityas. (Daityas'anaanl.) 

Daityas, Bhanda, etc. 

697. Subjugating all the worlds. (S'arvaloka- 
vas'amkarl.) 

698. Bestowing all objects . (of desire). (.Sarvartha- 
dhatrl.) 

Sarva, the four objects of human desires. The Devi 
Pr. says, “In all the wft’ks she gives righteousness and 
the other desired objects, hence she is called by all by the 
word Sarvartha sadhinl, (».e., fulfiller of all objects).” : 

699. Savitrl. 

The creator of the universe, i.e., the supreme Siva 
whose wife she is. The Vi. Dharmottara says, “He is 
called Savita because he creates beings.” The Bharadvaja 
Smr. also, “ As she gives light to the sun, or because she 
creates the Universe, she is called Savitrl.” The Vasishiha 
Rama, also repeats the same. The Devi Pr. says, “ Devi is 
worshipped by Devas, and worshipped by Yoga and in the 
Scriptures and she is naturally pure, hence she is called 
Savitrl.” The De. Bhag. Pr. : “ The root Sra means 
flowing, from the flow, arises brightness (Tejasl, hence she 
is called Savitrl.” 

According to the Padma Pr. she is the deity worship¬ 
ped at Pushkaratlrtha. 

26th verse divides 36 names. 

700. Existence, consciousness and bliss. (Sat-chit- 

anandarfipinl.) (136) 

Thus ends the eighth Kala, called Bhogada with the 
seventh hundred in the Saubhagyabhaskara composed by 
Bhasurananda. 



262 


LALITA SAHA3RANAMA 


0 

EIGHTH HUNDRED 

701. Unlimited by space and time. (DeffakSlSpari 
s’chchinnS.) 

The Yoga Stitra (I, 26) says, “ He is the Guru even of 
the ancients because he is not defined by time.” Ancients, 
Brahma, etc.. Guru, father. Limited by space, means the 
absolute non-existence of a thing in a certain place (saying) 
‘ This is not here.’ Limited by time, ‘ this was not before 
and it will not exist in future,’ addling having no antecedence 
nor precedence. The Saura. Sam. Says, ‘‘The Person is 
omnipresent like ether, as everything, except himself, is 
illusory, he is said to be unlimited as to space, time and 
things.” 

Limited as to the things, relative-difference (or mutual 
non-existencc'l between things such as ‘ this is here and that 
is not there, etc.’ 

702. Omnipresent. (Sarvaga.) 

She is inseparably present in all substances. The 
Varaha Pr. says, when Devi in the form of the creative 
Sakti was performing penance in the S'veta Mountain, 
Brahma said, ask a boon. Dev! replies, “ O holy one, I 
cannot bear to remain in one place, hence I beg of you 
to grant me the boon of omnipresence. Thus asked, 
Brahma then replied to the creative Devi, O thou of all 
forms, thou Shalt become omnipresent.” Of all forms, 
that is nothing is separate from her. Omnipresent, your 
qualified forms will be in all bodies or you will become 
the soul of all. The Devi Pr. also, “ O great wise one, 
this is the true established doctrine about Devi, she is 
certainly the Vedas, sacrifices, heaven ; all this Universe, 
animate and inanimate, is pervaded by Devi. She is 
sacrificed to and she is worshipped, she is food and drink. 
Everywhere Devi is present under different forms and 
names as in the trees, in the earth, wind, ether, water, fire. 
Thus, this Devi is ever to be worshipped according to the 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


m 


rules ; one who thus knows her, will be absorbed into 
her.” 

„ 703. All-bewildering. (Sarvamohinl.) 

How can this Devi be said to possess contradictory 
attributes such as, permanence and impermanence, anima¬ 
tion and non-animation, etc.? This name answers the 
above question. She bewilders (Mohini) all the ordinary 
people (Sarva), who believe in the reality of the apparent 
duality, that is she makes them devoid of the knowledge 
of Unity. The meaning <is that the apparent difference 
between Brahman and the Universe is illusory. 

In the Kttrma Pr. S'iva says, “This supreme S'akti is 
in mu and is Brahman itself. This Maya is dear to me, 
infinite, by which this world is bewildered, 0 best of the 
twice-born ones, I bewilder the whole Universe with the 
Devas, Daityas, and men ; and I create them and I cause 
them to exist.’’ In another place Devi says to Himavat, 
“ Whatever different scriptures are found in the world, 
opposed to S'ruti and Smriti, devoted to the position of 
duality, viz ., Kapala, Bhairava, S'akala, Gautama, and 
many similar ones, they are for the purpose of bewilder¬ 
ment ; those who are confused by the false scriptures, 
also confuse the world, in another cycle ; these were all 
created by me for the sake of bewilderment.” 

The Sft. Sam. (1-8-38) “ Sinful men, devoid of (my) 
grace bewildered by Maya and suffering birth, death, etc., 
do not know the Lord of gods.” 

Or she bewilders (Moha) the three worlds (Sarva) ; or 
this means she is bothTrailokyamohanachakra and its Vidya. 

704. Sarasvatl. 

Why should we make a difference between a pot and a 
cloth as their apparent difference is simply illusory 
according to (previous) rule ? The foregoing name answers 
the question. 

Snrntivatl is the deity which presides over knowledge, 
i.e., she is in the form of the ocean of knowledge. That 



264 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


means non-sensuous knowledge. The meaning is that 
though in the understanding of ordinary objects such as 
* pot, etc.,’ no bewilderment arises, as Bh. Gitit (5-15) says, 
“ Knowledge is covered by nescience hence people are 
bewildered,” and it is necessary to confuse sinful men 
because they are devoid of divine grace ; to conceal from 
them the knowledge of non-duality which is the highest of 
human desires and which removes all sorrow. 

According to Dhaumya, Sarasvatl is a girl of two 
years of age. The BhSradvaja Smr. says, “ Sarasvatl is 
she who ever resides in the tongue of all beings and who 
causes Speech, hence she is called Sarasvatl by great Rishis.” 
The Yasishfha Rama, also, “ She is called Sarasvatl because 
she is the stream of sense-impressions.” 1 

705. Sciences. (S'astramayi.) 

This bewilderment is not like the bewilderment as 
to locality, because the duality is to be inferred by a 
thousand arguments consisting of different contradictory 
qualities, etc., (in a thing). Hence this name. Chcha. Up., 
3-14-1.) “ All is Brahman,” etc., rests on the authority of 

scriptures alone. The meaning is the Scriptures alone are 
the convincing proof and not inference, etc., because 
in the light of the Sastras, inference, etc., are weak. 
Hence the Yed. Stltra (1-1-3) says, “S'astra is original 
(authority),” the Sastras set forth instructions of knowing 
only one (Brahman) such as, “I ask you that person 
spoken of in the Upanishads,” etc., (Br. Up., 3-9). So 
when by the scriptures Brahman is known to be with all 
things, which also is confirmed by the third division of the 
mantra (Panchadasl) the inferences opposed to that are to be 
attributed to confusion alone. Because all the doctrine of 
the Vedantas have the one object of establishing the unity 
of Brahman. The moon appears to every one as a span’s 
breadth in size, which appearance is opposed to the 

1 Bh. Nara Saras the flow of (nectar) from Brahmarandra, Vati , 
the possessor. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


265 


teachings of the science of astrology, hence to be 
false. 

Or, S'astrariviyi, her body and limbs are the scriptures. 
The Brahma. Pr. says, “ She created from her breath, the 
Vedas, viz.. Rig, Saman, Yajus, and Atharvan, and the great 
mantras from her egoism (Abhimana) ; from her sweet 
words she created poetry, drama, Rhetoric, etc. ; from her 
tongue, created. Sarasvati. . From her chin, whose eyes-, 
resemble the Chakora bird, the six supplementary of the 
Vedas ; from the top of her throat, MlmumsS, Ny'iyas'astra, 
Purawas, Dharma S'astras ; from the middle of her throat 
Medicine and Archery ; from the bottom of her throat the 
Sixty,four Sciences ; from the rest of her limbs all other 
Tantras ; and from her shoulders the Science of love.” 

706. The mother of Guha. (Guhamba.) 

(Question). Duality is not only commonly accepted 
like the idea, the moon is measured by a span, but is also 
Scriptural. 

Guhdmba : Guha, in the cavity, Amba, mother, i.e., 
remaining in the cavity (of the heart) in the form of 
shadow. The Sruti (Kafh. Up., Ill—1) says, “ There are the 
two, drinking their reward in the world of their own works, 
entered into the cave (of the heart) dwelling on the highest 
summit (the ether in the heart). Those who know Brah¬ 
man call them shade and light. Likewise those house¬ 
holders who perform the Trinachiketa Sacrifice.’’ The 
meaning is that as both, viz., shadow and light, enter the 
cavity of the heart, and both differ from one another ; so 
duality is sanctioned by the Scriptures.. 

Or, Guha means Subrahroanya. In order to destroy 
the Daitya Taraka, at the request of the Devas, the 
conjunction of S'iva and S'akti took place, and in that 
(Union) an obstruction was experienced ; (consequently) 
S'iva became angry and uttered a curse. Then his seed 
was dissipated into the fire, the Ganga and reeds. Thus the 
Story of .the birth of Skanda is given. This and other 
34* 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


similar stories of him; are to be known from the Scriptures 
which support the theM5y , W$ duality. The non-dualistic 
Scriptures are merely fo! U|g_sake of praise. Because it is 
opposed to direct percftjjljpii-'?like the Sruti which says, 
“ when the sacrificer is sWtdto be the dltar.” 

707. The secret. (Guhyarflpinl.) 

(Answer). All the ordinary (ideas, i.e., of duality, etc.,) 
are only true for a time, but non-duality is ever true. This 
(Non-duality) is most secret (Guhya) not perceivable by 
ordinary vision ; rupn, the form (her nature). The Sfl. 
Sam. (4-47-69) says, “ We adore Devi, who assumes the 
form of the Guru, secret, in the form of secret knowledge, 
beloved by her secret devotees, residing in the secret place.” 
Thus by attributing two "forms to the one Brahman the two 
kinds of scriptures are reconciled. Guhya means the 
Guhya Up. which is her form. The Karma Pr. in describing 
the glory of Devi says, “ Among the Upanishads, 0 Devi, 
you are the Guhyopanishad.” „ (137) 

708. Free from ' all limitations. (Sarvopadhivinir- 
mukta.) 

(Question). But if both scriptures are authoritative, 
non-duality is not established. (Answer) Sarvnpadhi, all 
limitations or attributes such as, the Mother of Skanda, 
shadow, and light, etc., whether conditioned or uncondition¬ 
ed. The relation between the qualities and the thing 
which is qualified is illusory (or false) like the relation of 
the silver in the mother-of-pearl. To establish the authority 
of the scriptures as' truth-indicating, it must be explained 
that all the Vedantas mean directly or indirectly one and 
the same supreme Brahman, which is non-duality. The 
other scriptures which advocate duality are to be taken as 
explaining the ordinary vision as we find the same in the 
science of eclipse where it is indicated (by the words) 5 or 
6 fingers with regard to the consumption (of the sun and 
moon). So both the scriptures one (advocating) the duality 
and the other non-duality, are not to be dealt with equally. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


267 


Or Bhe is free from the limitations established by 
logicians, or she is to be known by their real proof (sat- 
hetu). 

709. The devoted spouse of Sad&sSva. (SadSsdvapati- 
vrata.) 

(Question). If the above is true, as Tripurasundarl is 
in the form of energy, and as she is in the form of Supreme 
egoism (Parahant.aJ and other qualities, these attributes 
become illusory. (Answer) ‘ Devoted to Siva ’ means ever 
remaining with him in all the three times. The other 
attributes are imaginary and their qualities are also imagi¬ 
nary. But in this S'akti only the qualities are attributed, 
not the energy itself, hence she belongs to Brahman (or she 
is the same as Brahman). 

710. Fount of traditional (wisdom.) (Sampradayes’- 
varl.) 

(Objection). How, in the absence of special authority, 
can all qualities except the ParahantS, be said to be 
imaginary ? Rather all the qualities must be unreal and 
false. 

(Answer). Sampradtlya, the wisdom regularly (Sam.) 
imparted (Prada.va) to the disciples (by the teachers) ; 
Isruarl , ruling. This (knowledge) is arrived at by reason 
and by tradition. Just as ether and other qualities are 
attributed to Brahman which is without attributes, again of 
the ether, etc., when predicated of Brahman, Sound, Sub¬ 
stance, etc., are attributed, again, when these are predicated 
of Brahman, other qualities are attributed to them, 
similarly, as in Brahman, which is without attributes both 
the visible qualities and the things which are qualified are 
attributed, one thing becomes both quality and possessor of 
quality. Here Siva is qualified, S'akti is the quality. This 
is to be known by tradition alone. Those who possess the 
tradition say that Brahman itself is the S'akti. 

S'amprad&ya may mean, also the S'ampradSya meaning 
of Panchadasl as explained in the Yoginihridaya (2-15) and 



268 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


in the Dattatreya Samhita. We have said concerning this 
in our book, Yari. rahasya this ‘Sampradaya meaning’ is 
more fitted to the KadividyA. 

711. Well done'. (Sadhu.) 

As we see burning, etc., to be the (.inherent) quality of 
fire only, so Parahanta is rightly said to bo the (inherent) 
quality of Devi. 

712. 2. (Kamakala.) 

This name proceeds to say that quality (Parahanta) has 
two forms. This narre is one-syllabled belonging to the 
Turly a known as Kamakala. The derivation of the 2 is 
from A, and adding 1 : i.e., A, Vishnu and!his sister. The 
meaning is she partakes the nature of Vishnu (A), and that 
of his sister (2). 

The Brahman becomes twofold by becoming both the 
quality and the thing qualified. Again the quality is divid¬ 
ed into two, masculine and feminine. The feminine became 
the wife of Paramasiva, the masculine becama>VishMu as 
the material cause of the Universe. These three together, 
according to S'aiva doctrine form the partless Brahman. 
This doctrine is supported by the Ktkrma and other Prs., 
and also Appayadlkshita elaborately deals with it in his 
work Ratnatraya pariksha. 

The nature of Kamakala is explained in the Vamakes'va- 
ratantra (Yoginlhridaya, 1,10 and 11) thus: “Without 
vowels, beyond the Visarga, beyond the knowledge arising 
from the vibrating Bindu , from the 2. (f) the real nature 

of Prabas'a, joined with the flow of vibration, arises, 0 
beloved, this, Maya, the Turiya, the creator of the 
Thu verse.” 1 The Jnanarnava says, “ The syllable 2 is to be 
known as the red colour.shining.” The same is repeated 
in the Vayu Pr., in the Kama Kalavilasa and other works. 
S'rl Sankaracharya in his work Saundaryalaharl (SI. 19), 
gives the mode of the worship of Kamakala. 

> The commentator has given three different meanings to the 
above verse in his Setubandha. 



LAIiITA SAHASRANAMA 


713. In the company of spiritual teachers. (Guru- 
mandalartlpinl.) 

This name indicates that the determination of the 
nature of that (Im) must be ascertained from the teacher 
alone, because it is most secret. 

Gurus, from Paramas’iva to one’s own teacher, manda- 
la, the regular succession (of them). The meaning is that 
this secret was handed down uninterruptedly from teacher 
to pupil and was not written in books. Hence it is said in 
the Yoginlhridaya (1, 3). “ Into this world (this secret) was 
handed down from ear to ear. ” (138) 

714. Transcending the senses. (Kulottlrna.) 

This and the next three (names) express the secrecy 
(of the doctrine). 

Kula, the group of senses. 

715. To be worshipped in the Sun. (BhagSradhya.) 

Bhaga, the sun’s disc. Because the sun’s disc is the 

object of secret adoration. 

Or Bhaga, the letter E., i.e.. She is to be worshipped 
through the letter E. For it is Said, “The eleventh letter 
of her (Mantra <t) is the support and the seed and is in the 
triangle form, etc.” (Setubhandha, I, 6) and See the Com. I, 
17. supra). 

716. Illusion. (Maya.). 

The energy which obscures what is plain, is Maya. 
But in the Devi Pr. it is said, “ It is called Maya because it 
is the instrument of marvellous actions, producing unheard 
of results, like dreams or jugglery.’’ The same is set forth 
at length in the Yaraha Pr. where Vishnu says to the 
Earth : “ The cloud sends forth rain and water is collected. 
Next the quarters become clear. This is my Maya, 0 
beloved one. Even the moon wanes, again waxes, and on 
the newmoon day it is invisible . . . This is my 

power of illusion, by it 1 remain in the water. I create 
Prajapatis as well as I destroy them.” Thus, in thirty-six 
verses, he describes the power of Maya. The Sandilya 




270 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


SOtra (86) says, “ His energy is Maya . . .” His 

energy, the Lord’s energy. 

717. Honey. (Madhumati.) 

Madhu, mead, honey. The S'ruti says, “ The nature of 
the great deity is honey-like ; ” or this means the Madhn- 
vidya of the Chcha. Up. (3-1-1) : “The Son is the honey 
of the Devas . . .” 

Or, there are four kinds of Yogins as mentioned in the 
Yoga S'astras. Of these the fourth is he who is called 
AtikrSntabhSvana (who transcends even the state of medi¬ 
tation). He is the highest of them all. He also should 
overcome the seven foundations (Bhfimikas), of these the 
last is called Madhumati, hence her name. That wisdom 
alone which arises from this foundation causes one to cross 
over the ocean of the Samsara. This is explained in the 
commentaries of the Yoga Sfitra (III, 54) : “ The knowledge 
resulting from discrimination in emancipating (TSraka) 
Omni-objective, super-objective, instantaneous.” 

Madhumati is the name of a river also. 

718. Earth. (Mahi.) 

Mahl is the name of a river. The Devi Pr. says, “ It 
is great because it pervades all, hence Prabriti is called 
Mahl.” 

719. Mother of hosts. (GawSmba.) 

Gana, the hosts of Pramatha, etc., or Ganes'a. 

720. Worshipped by the Guhyakas. (GuhyakSrad- 
dhya.) 

Guhyakas may mean a kind of Deva, or an unknown 
secret place. (MuladhSra) 

, , 721. Tender-limbed. (Komalangt.) 

722. Beloving the Guru. (Gurupriya.) 

Or the wife of the Guru ; Guru, S'iva, the guru of the 
world, she is his wife. (139) 

723. Independent. (Svatantra.) 

As she creates without depending on instruments she 
is called Svatantra. Svatantra, is the name of a book. 



LALITA SAHASHANAMA 271 

Or, Svatantra : all the Tantras belong to her ; even in 
the Shiva, Vaishwava, Ganapatya, etc., her glory only is 
described, hence all Tantras are Hers. 

Or, Sva, Self, i.e., Paramas'iva, Tantra depending. 
The meaning is that each depends on the other. The 
Kalika Pr. says, “ S'iva ever lives in that place sporting 
with Devi. In the centre is the abode of Devi, Sankara 
ever remains there. In the north-east of that mountain is 
the hermitage of Sankara where he lives for ever. Parvati 
also remains there.” 

724. The ruler of all Tantras. (Sarvatantresl) 

The Tantras are sixty-four in number ; Isl, the 
promulgator. 

725. In the form of Dakshinamtlrti. (Dakshina- 
mftrtirttpinl). 

‘ Dakshinamtlrti ’ is Siva sitting faced southwards, 
well-known as the instructor of Brahma, Narayana, etc., 
whose mantras are found described in the Tantras. 

726. Worshipped by Sanaka and others. (Sanakadi 
samaradhya.) 

Hence they are included in the succession of gurus. 
The Brahma. Pr. says, “Thou art the beginningless, the 
whole, in the form of cause and effect, the Yogins, Sanaka, 
etc., are searching after you alone.” 

727: Bestowing the knowledge of Siva. (Slvajna- 
napradayinl.) 

The Vasishffia Ram. says, “ Wind is recognised by 
motion, fire by heat, Siva who is consciousness, purity 
and tranquillity, is known by his vibratory energy. There 
is no other way (to know him.)” 

Or, Siva is the bestower of the knowledge of Devi. 
The Varaha Pr. says, “ These three (Trimtlrtis) are attained 
by one who really knows Rudra. (Siva).” (140) 

728. Chitkala. 

Chit, Brahman which is existence, knowledge, and 
bliss ; Kala part. 



272 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Or, Chitkala, the consciousness encased in the mind 
because it is a small part of that consciousness which has 
no vehicle (i.e., Brahman). The Bh. Gita (15-7) : “ My 
part alone in the world are the eternal Jlvas.” The Padma 
Pr. while enumerating the (different) forms of Devi, says, 
“ In the mind of all embodied souls, resides the energy 
called Chitkala.” 

729. Germ of bliss. (Anandakalika.) 

She is one portion of the bliss enjoyed by.Jlvas. The 
Sruti (Trai. Up., 2-7-1) says, “ Other beings live by apart of 
this bliss.” 

Or, it means the bud of the Anandamaya sheath. (Kos'a). 

730. Affection. (Premartlpa.) „ 

Prema, affection or devotion. 

731. Causing affection. (Priyamkarl.) 

732. Delighting in the repetition of (Her) names. 
(Namaparayanaprita.) 

From A to Ksha are her names, A is one and Ka and 
the rest are thirty-five, in all thirty-six, these thirty-six 
represent thirty-six years. When we add to each the 
sixteen vowels, so many months are obtained. These 
are 576 and are the first letters. Again add the 36 
letters in second place of each letter in order. Then 
the total names become 20,737. The Laghu Stuti (S'lo. 19) 
confirms the above statement. . The De. Bhag. (Book III) : 
“When from A to Ksha the vowels are joined to the 
consonants, countless names, O Son of Baghu, are 
obtained.” 

The repetition of these names in five ways is described 
in the Kadimata. “ By day, week, fortnight, month and 
year, etc.” Thus is the ceremony of the repetition of the 
• •names. So also the repetition of this Sahasranama. 
Because according to the etymological meaning and the 
conventional meaning ‘ the repetition of names ’ means 
this thousand also. For there is a saying (see supra. 
Chap. 1-45) “ Whether one worships me or not or 



LALITA 8AHASRAHAMA 


273 


repeats the Mantra or not, he must repeat these thousand 
names always in order to please me.’’ 

733. The Science of Nandi. (Nandividya.) 

The Vidya worshipped by Nandi. 

734. Nates’varl. ' (141) 

She is the wife of the Dancer, the NaZaraja of 

Chidambara. 

735. Basis of the illusory Universe. (Mithya 
jagadadhishthan a.) 

She is the basis of the illusory universe as the mother- 
of-pearl is the basis of the silver (illusorily perceived). For 
the Sfutis (Gaud. Ka. 1-17J say: ‘ ‘ This duality is mere Maya, 
non-duality is the reality.” (Br. Up., 4-4-19), “ Here there 
is no manifoldness whatever.” The De. Bhag. Pr., “ Indeed 
I am alone all this, there is never any other.” (Vi. Bhag., 
1-1-1). “Where the three evolutions, are illusory.” 

Or, AdhishthO,, basis, i.e ., in whom all are sustained, 
is Brahman, Ana, life. Her life is the Brahman (who is 
the basis of the universe). 

Or, Adhishthana, supported (i.e., in Her all are 
sustained). 

Really according to the doctrine of the Tantrikas who 
hold that the universe is the manifestation of Brahman, 
the universe is real, because like the pot and clay, as the 
universe and Brahman are not different, when Brahman is 
real the universe must necessarily be real. As it is 
accepted that difference (along the created things) alone 
is illusory all the scriptures advocating the non-duality are 
right As the difference is false, the relation of the 
supporter and supported is also false. Such being the 
case, the theory of the Yedantins that the whole Universe 
is illusory is absurd, for further detail refer to the S'flmbha- 
vanandakalpalats. So the appearance of difference in the 
universe is illusory. 

27th verses divides 43 names. 

736. Giver of salvation. (Muktida.) 

35* 



274 


LAL1TA SAHA8RANAMA 


The Kflrma Pr. says, “ Hence one desirons of salvation 
should take refuge in Psrvatl, Parames'varl, the Soul of 
all beings and also of Siva.” The Siva Pr., “ If one 
recites the names of the supreme Lord even unconscionsly 
Siva gives him salvation. Why say more ? ” The Brahma. 
Pr. also says, “ Those who worship the supreme Sakti 
whether regularly or irregularly, are not entangled in 
SamsSra. There is no doubt, they are the liberated 
souls.” 

737. Salvation. (Muktirfipinl.) 

By destruction of Avidya or by recovering the fifth 
state, one does not obtain the supreme object of human 
desire (i.e., salvation), but it should be said only when 
one remains in his own bliss, (the real) salvation comes 
to him. The Saura Sam. (Chap. 14) says, “ I will now 
concisely declare the nature of salvation, by the know¬ 
ledge of which supreme salvation is attained by all embodi¬ 
ed souls.” It is said knowledge is the means, then 
refuting that “ the knowledge is not the means, 0 learned, 
but is merely calling to remembrance,” again ‘ know¬ 
ledge is neither effect nor substance, etc.,’ refuting the 
theory that Salvation is neither substance, quality, 
action, nor SamSnya, etc. (SamavSya and Abhava). 

1 Hence the supreme salvation is becoming the absolute 
Self ’ ; thus establishing .the real doctrine concludes, 
‘ Hence supreme Salvation is of the nature of the Self, 
and this was veiled by Avidya and again revealed by 
knowledge.’ 

738. Fond of dancing. (Lasyapriya.) 

. .739. Causing absorption. (Layakari.) 

Laya, a peculiar state of mind, for it is said, ‘‘Laya 
(mental absorption) is equal to ten meditations.” Laya 
also means a pause in the music. 

740. Shame. (Lajja.) 

It is said (Mark. Pr.) ‘ Dev! who resides in all 
beings in the form of shame.” 




LAI.ITA SAHASBANAMA 275 

741. Adored by Eambha and others. (Rambha- 
divandita.) 

Others, Urvasl, etc. Rambha, Hrillekhablja. (142) 

742. The rain of nectar (falling) in the forest-fire of 
worldly existence. (BhavadAva sudhAvrishtih.) 

Or, Bhava, Siva, da, gift; vasu, wealth or jewel, da, 
gift, vrishti shower of both. Thus this name is to be 
also divided into three names (as Bhavada, Vasudha, 
Vrishtih), that is, she is the bestower of the worldly 
enjoyment and Salvation. The Rudrayamala and the 
Mangalarftjastava say, “ Where there is worldly enjoy¬ 
ment there is no salvation, where there is salvation 
there* is no worldly enjoyment. To the best devotees of 
S'rlsundarl, salvation and enjoyment are both in their 
hands.” 

743. The forest-fire (consuming) the forest of sin. 
(PapSranyadavAnalA.) 

The Br. Naradlya Pr. says, “ The supreme name 
of Ganga is the fire that consumes the forest of Sin 
(because) Ganga is the remover of the disease of 
Samsara. Therefore it should be sought with much 
effort.” 

Or, Dava (forest fire) means devotion, etc., which are 
the means of destroying sin. Ana, life-energy, la, 
receive, that is she reveals the actions which remove 
sin. The Brahma. Pr. says, “The Supreme expiation 
of all sin whether committed knowingly or unknowingly 
is said to be the remembrance of the feet of the supreme 
S'akti.” In another chapter it is said, “ Hear 0 Devendra, 
this great supreme Secret which immediately destroys 
all sin, possessed of devotion and faith, after bathing, 
stand in the water and repeat the Panchadasl mantra one 
thousand and eight times. Thus worshipping the supreme 
S'akti, he is released from all sin.” 

744. The gale (blowing away) misfortune like thistle 
down (lit. tufted seeds of reed). (DaurbhAgyatfllavatQla.) 



276 


LALITA SAHASRAKAMA 


Or, Vatrda, certain good actions which make mis* 
fortune become as light as the thistle downs ; the meaning 
is such actions originate from her alone. 

745. The sun beam (dispelling) the darkness of decay. 

(Jaradhvantaraviprabha.) {143) 

746. The moonbeams (illuminating) the ocean of good 
fortune. (Bhagyabdhichandrika.) 

747. The cloud that (nourishes) the peacocks which are 
the minds of her devotees. (Bhaktachittakeklghanaghana.) 

Or, Ghana, cloud, the deeds of Devi, Aghana, continual; 
Her life work is the spiritual nourishment for her devotees. 

748. The thunderbolt (which shivers) the mountain 

of disease. (Rogaparvatadambholih.) « 

749. The axe (that cuts down) the tree of death. 
(Mrityudarukutharika.) 

D&ru,, according to the Vararuchi’s system means 28 
(Ra 2 and Da 8) Mrityu (lit. death) pains, that is, the twenty- 
eight kinds of pains described before {vide name 354) as 
differentiated by energy, success and elation. The Sruti 
KaCha. Up. (2-25) says “ To Him the death is (like) pickle.” 
The eight names from 742 to 749 are described by similes 
(Rhpakftlankara). (144) 

750. MahesVari. 

751. MahakSli. 

Malm, great, KMl, fate. She is called great because 
she rules over even death. ’ The Mahakall is the deity 
worshipped at UjjayinI, or she is the wife of Mahakala. 

752. The great devourer. (Mahagrasa.) 

The Bruti (Katha. Up., 2-25) : “ Of whom both Brah- 
mtpia and Kshatriya are food.” 

753. The great eater. (Mahasana.) ' 

Mahat, because consuming both the animate and the 

inanimate Universe. 

754. Aparna. 

Apa, removing, rina, debt. We said in our Devlstava : 
“ When you have not discharged your debt to me, though 



LA LIT A SAHASRANAMA - 277 

I, repeat your name, O Siva, why are you not ashamed to 
bear the name of AparwS “ (the discharger of debt) ” ? 
According to the Nirukta, Parna, falling, aparna free from 
falling. 

Or, a-parna. without a leaf. The Kalika Pr. says, 
“ She renounced even leaves as food, (when she was making 
Tapas), hence the daughter of Himavat is called by Devas 
Aparna.” The same is repeated in the Brahma. Pr. 

755. Chandika. 

The root ‘ chandi ’ means anger. She becomes angry 
with those who are not (her) devotees. 

According to the De. Bhag. Pr., a girl of seven years 
of age is called Chandika. 

756. Destroyer of Daityas, chanda and munda. 
(Chandamundasuranishfldinl.) 

Hence she alone is to be called Chamunda. The Mark. 
Pr. says, "Because you captured the Daityas Chanda, and 
Munda, you shall be called Chamunda.” But the Varaha 
Pr. says, “ Devi struck the Daitya Ruru with her trident 
and cut off his head and because she carried off the head 
{Munda) and trunk {Charma) she is called Chamunda.” 
We find also in the Koka (Slo. 44) “ Karnamoti is called 
Chamunda and Charchika, Charmamunda. ” (145) 

757. Perishable and imperishable. (Ksharaksharat- 
mika.) 

Kshara, multiform, akshara, syllables, Atma, her 
body ; i.e., she is one-syllabled and also many-syllabled. 
The Varaha Pr. says, “Though Devi is all-syllabled, yet 
she is called one-syllabled, she is the ruler of the Universe, 
she alone is all-syllabled.” 

Or, Kshara is applied to all beings and Akshara to 
Ktdastha (Lord), she is both {vide Bh. Gita, 15-16). 

The Bharata says, “Being and non-being (Sat and 
Asat) are called Kshara and Akshara. ” The Vi. Bhag. Pr. 
says, “ There are three forms of Vishnu called Purushas, 
those who know say, the first is the creator of the Mahat, 



278 


LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


the second is the mundane egg, the third is what resides in 
all beings, by knowing these one is released.” 

758. Ruler of all worlds. (Sarvalokesl.) 

759. Supporter of the universe. (Vis'vadharinl.) 

760. Giver of the three objects of desire. (Trivarga- 
datri.) 

761. Good fortune. (Subhaga.) 

According to Dhaumya, a girl of five years of age is 
called Subhaga. 

Bhaga, means wealth, desire, magnanimity, strength, 
effort, fame, etc., su, excellently (remain in Her). The 
Visva says, “ Bhaga means dominion, wisdom, dispassion, 
womb, fame, strength, effort, desire, wealth, virtue, sun, 
and salvation.” 

Bhaga, the sun, by her the sun is illuminated. Because 
she resides in the sun and causes all its works. The 
Vishnu Pr. (II, 11 vide Wilson’s translation). 

“ The whole and supreme energy of Vishnu, which is 
called the three Vedas, Rig, Yajus and SSman lightens the 
whole universe and destroys its iniquity. Wherever every 
month the sun exists there is this energy of Vishnu, com¬ 
posed of the three Vedas. The Rigs shine in the morning, 
the Yajus at noon, Brahatratha and other portions of the 
Saman at the end of the day. Thus the manifestation (of 
the energy) of Vishnu is threefold known as Rig, Yajus 
and Saman. The energy of Vishnu ever abides in the sun. 
The threefold energy of Vishnu does not only exist in the 
sun, but is also manifest in Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. 
Thus these (three gods) are also the three Vedas. The sun 
ever possessed with the energy neither rises nor sets. In 
this way the energy of Vishnu exists in the sun encircled 
by seven troops. As a man, nearing a mirror kept on a 
stand, observes in it his own image so the energy of Vishnu 
is never disjoined but remains month by month in the sun 
which is there placed.” “The seven troops are, Devas, 
Rishis, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yakshas, Sadhyas and 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 279 

Rakshasas.” Th« collective meaning of the above passage 
is the seven troops are the causes of the sun’s monthly 
changes, but the energy, as she is the foundation of all, 
does not change. 

Subhaga may mean either the eight things used in 
auspicious occasions, as the Padma Pr. says, “ Sugar-cane, 
TarurSja, the Nishpa and Vajlra seeds, the cow’s milk with 
all its transformation, Kusumbha flowers and salt ” ; or 
Devi herself ; for the same Padma Pr. says, “ What else 
should not one—whether a man or woman—obtain by 
worshipping UmS with devotion, who is the conferrer of 
blessings to Devas, and bestower of enjoyment and salva¬ 
tion on all human kind.” ? 

762. Three-eyed. (Tryambika.) 

The Dev. Pr. says, “ The moon, the sun and the fire 
are the three eyes of Devi, hence she is called by sages 
three-eyed.” 

Tri, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra, amba, mother, (t.e., 
mother of Brahma, etc.). 

763. Possessed of the three qualities. (Trigunatmika.) 

Her body is the equilibrium of the three qualities 

Satva, Raja and Tamas. (146) 

764. Bestower of heaven and salvation. (SvargApa- 
vargada.) 

The Sruti says, “ That happiness which is not inter¬ 
rupted by pain (now) or in future, attained through desire, 
is called Svarga.” This happiness is temporary. The 
happiness in salvation is an eternal one. 

765. Pure: (S'uddha.) 

Free from the stains of Avidya. 

766. Whose body is like the China-rose. (JapApush- 
panibhAkritih.) 

This name may be taken as two adding the syllable a 
before, as ‘ Ajapa ’ and ‘ Pushpanibhakritih.’ 

Ajapa, is a mantra and the description of its nature is 
given in the DakshinA. Sam.: “Without repetition 



LALI'f A SAHASRANAMA 


(Japa), 0 Devesl, that which brings to the practitioners of 
Mantra the attainment (the result) of the repetition, is 
called Ajap8, which breaks asunder the noose of the 
Samsara.” 

Pushpa, according to the Hema Kosia, means the 
flowering season, chariot of Kubera, flower and the beauty 
of the eyes, 

767. Vitality. (Ojovatl.) 

Ojas is explained as the eighth substance (Dhatu) in the 
Vedic Commentaries. Some explain it as the vitality of the 
senses. The Vis'va says : “ Ojas means light, the vitality 
of the substances, splendour, strength and radiance ; ” 
as she possesses all these things she is called Ojovatl, 

768. The light bearer. (Dyutidhara.) 

769. Sacrifice. (Yajnarttpa.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Sam.) says : “ Yajna means Vishnu.” 

Or the sacrifices form Her body. The Harivamsa and 
Padma Prs. when they speak of the Lord say, “ Vedas are 
his feet, the sacrificial post his teeth, the oblation his hand, 
the pile of sacrificial fuel his face, the fire his tongue, (the 
sacrificial) rules his hair, the Brahmana his head, day and 
night his eyes, the Vedantas his ear-ornaments, the sacrifi¬ 
cial ladle his mouth, the ghee his nose, the great sound of 
the Saman his voice, he is virtue and truth, good actions 
his moving to and fro, penance his finger nails, the 
sacrificial animals his knees, Audgatra his bowels, the homa 
his organ of generation, the fruits his organs, Vayu his 
inner self, the mantras his hips, the soma juice his blood, 
the Vedas his shoulders, oblation his Smell, oblation to 
gods (Havya) and oblation to manes (Kavya) his speed, the 
space before the altar his body, worshipped by many vows, 
gift his heart, Yogin, possessing great mantras, the great 
supplementary ceremonies his lips and chin, the 
pravargya (hymn of 8&man) his navel, the different metres 
his gait, the Guhyopanishad his seat, the shadow his wife, 
he is as high as the summit of thfe Meru.” 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


281 


According to the Mukhyamnayarabasya YajnarCtpa, 
“ The great sacrifice is worshipping one’s own Self with 
much devotion, by perfumes, etc., which he cognises by his 
own sensed” 

770. Fond of vows. (Priyavrata.) 

She is fond of all vows even those which are made to 
other deities. The Bhavishyottara Pr. says, “ He who 
makes a vow to any god or to goddess, all is for the delight 
of S'iva and Devi who are the creators of the world. There 
is no difference here because the whole world is S'iva and 
S'akti.” 

Priyavrata also means the name of a king. (147) 

771. Difficult of worship. (Duraradhya.) 

Impossible to be worshipped by the fickle minded. 

772. Difficult of control. (Duradharsha.) 

It is said “She is not to be attained by the fickle- 
minded men.” 

Or, Dur, difficult, adharsha controlling, i.e., it is very 
difficult to perceive her. 

773. Fond of Pafall flowers.” (Patallkusumapriya.) 

P&tali, a red and white flower. The Padma Pr. says, 

“ S'iva is fond of Bilva tree and Devi of the Palais.” 

774. The great. (Mahatl.) 

As she manifests in the form of the things she is called 
Mahat. The Sakapdrni explains it is the Mahat by which 
all things are measured. Yaska explains it to be worshipp¬ 
ed. Mahatl means (also) the Vina of Narada. 

775. Residing on Meru. (Merunilaya.) 

It is described in the Tantraraja in the 28th chapter 
thus, “ Now I shall, describe to you the sixteen Nitya deities 
which are the Lokas,” after describing their world with all 
its oceans and islands it continues, “ In the midst of Meru, 
the great shining Lalita, ever remains,” around it (the 
Meru) there are fourteen continents up to the ocean where 
the other deities (remain). Beyond them in the last 
supreme ether, is the Chitra’s and other deities’ abode. 

36* 



282 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


This and other peculiarities are described (in the above 
book) and these are to be known from a guru alone. 

Or, Srlchakra has three aspects (PrastSras) Bhfimi, 
Kailasa and Meru. The BbfiprastSra is when it is identified 
with the eight deities, viz., (Fas'inT, etc., when it is with the 
Matrika letters, it is the Kailasa, and the Meru is when it 
is with the sixteen Mitya deities. Merunilaya means she 
abides in the (mental) identification with sixteen Mitya 
deities. The mode of the meditation is given threefold 
in the three Samhitas, of Sanatkumara, Sanandana and 
Vasishtha. 

Or, Meru,, the nine-syllabled mantra as described in 
the Jnanamava indicated by the following words, 
“ Bhhmi, Chandra, S'iva, Maya, S'akti, Krislmadhva, 
Madana, Ardachandra and Bindu.” Nilaya, the place 
wherefrom all other mantras arise. 

776. Bond of mandara flowers. (Mandarakusumap- 
riya.) 

Mandara. Devataru or the S'vetitrka tree. (148) 

777. Worshipped by warriors. (VlrSradhya.) 

The characteristic of the Vlras is given thus : “ One 
who enjoys (realises) the Self, the remover of pain, brings 
about the dissolution of egoism and of what is opposed 
(to the Self, i.n., duality), devoted to bravery.” 

778. Viradrflpa, (referred to above name 256.) 

28th verse divides 48 names. 

779. Without passion. (Virajah.) 

Vi, without, rajas, sin. Viraja, is the presiding 
deity at the Utkalakshetra. The Brahma. Pr. says, 
At Viraja the goddess is Viraja established by Brahma. 
By seeing her a mortal purifies as far as seven gener¬ 
ations.” ‘ Rajas ’ also means light, water and worlds. 

780. Facing every way. (Vis'vatomukhl.) 

The S'ruti (S've. Up., 3-3) says, “ Having eyes and 
mouths on all sides.” When a form is created by devotees 
through meditation then alone does she become manifest 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


283 


as the passages show, “ Having hands, feet on all sides, 
and eyes, mouths and head everywhere.” 

The other passages such as “He has no hand or 
feet, etc.,” speak in the real sense. Hence there is no 
contradiction in the above passages. . 

781. Interior. (PratyagrdpS.) ’ 

Pratyak, tending inwards; the direction of the 
Senses towards objects is called Bahirmukhatva and 
Paranmukhatva (external) ; their inward direction towards 
the Self is called Antarmukhatva and PrStyanmukhatva.. 
The S'rutI (Kaflia. Up., 4-1) says, “ The Self-existent made 
the senses . . . Hence one sees externally but not 

internally.” The meaning is that Her nature is to be seen 
internally. 

782. The supreme ether. (Parakasa.) 

Because she is without quality, i.e ., she is Para- 
brahman. The Chcha. Up. (1-9-1) in the following 
passages means ether as Parabrahman, “ He said that 
is ether, ether is the greatest of all these things. This 
ether is the supreme rest.” It is also declared in the 
Yed. Slltra (1-1-22), “The ether is Brahman on account 
of characteristic marks.” That is it does not mean the 
elemental ether. The Karma Pr. says, “ Whose (of 
Brahman) supreme divine energy is called ether.” Thus 
she is the origin of the Universe, viz., one, all, all-con¬ 
trolling, Mahes'varl, energy, without beginning, called 
ether, as if shining in the heaven. 

Or, Par&kaxa, is the supreme ether as declared by 
the S'ruti (Tai. Up., 3-6-1): “He is established in the 
supreme ether.” This is of two kinds, one in the Uni¬ 
verse, and the other, in the body. Here Parakas'a means 
the place of the manifestation of Brahman—she is in 
that form. The Chitghanachandrika, says, “ The fire 
which moves in the ether, residing between the sun and 
the moon, which are in the heart, which is the energy of 
the action ; that which is above the flame is the supreme 



284 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


ether. There, 0 mother, show me Siva.” The Svach- 
chandasangraha also says, “ Above the forehead there is 
a place called Dvadas’Snta, where the top of the skull ends 
and two fingers beyond the head, there is what is called 
the supreme ether.’’ 

Or the ether beyond the seven oceans is called 
Parakiis'a. There Lalita abides in her sixteenth year. 
The Kadimata says, “ From the Krita year, in each 
year (the sixteen Nitya deities) abide (in a particular 
place.) Thus * in the second year, by the term (each 
deity) dwell. In the sixteenth year, Lalita, abides in 
the supreme ether. To the Salila ocean by term, Chitra 
and other deities, go. Thus (the Nitya deities) tgike a 
round.” The meaning is there are sixteen places, viz., 
Meru, the seven continents, the seven oceans, and 
Par aka Sa ; these are also called Varshas, (years) ; of these, 
the first is the first year of Kritayuga, in that year the 
sixteen Nitya deities, viz., Lalita, Kamesvarl, Bhagamalini, 
etc., to Chirta remain. In the second year Lalita remains 
in the Kshara ocean ; the next deity goes to the next place 
and so on. By this method in the sixteenth year Lalita 
goes to the Parakasa. Thus the cycle. 

Or, Parafca, a kind of expiation called Kricbra 08a, 
(lit quarter) the object to be attained. The meaning is. 
Her path is only to be attained by penance. Or, ova, to 
eat, i.e., she is the enjoyer of the result produced from 
such penances. 

According to the Viswa, “ Aka means sin and pain,” 
para highest, and a8a, to consume, (i.e., she destroys sin 
and pain of her devotees). PwrAkOga may mean also 
‘ without illustration.’ 

783. Giver of life. (Pranada.) 

Prana , the five kinds of vital breath or the eleven 
senses da, (lit. to destroy) to control. In the Ved. Sutra 
(I, 1, 23), “ For the same reason breath is Brahman,” it is 
declared that the word ‘ breath ’ of the Kaushltakl Up. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 285 

denotes Brahman. (The passage is as follows:) “I am 
Prana, I am consciousness, worship me as age and 
immortality.” 

784. The life. (Pr5nar0pinl.) 

Hence Pr&na means Brahman. S'ruti also (Chcha. Up., 
4-10-5) says, “ Prana is Brahman, Ka is Brahman, ether is 
Brahman.” Manu Smr. (12-123) : “ The same (Brahman) 
some call fire, others Manu, others Prajapati, others Indra, 
others breath and others Mahes'varl.” 

Or in the Nitya Tr. the sixteen Nitya (feities are called 
Pranas, etc., because from the time of one respiration 
(Akvasa) the day, month, etc., are determined; again 
“ twenty-two and half respirations make orderly the 
twelve-zodiacal signs ” ; by this and other passages, it is 
described to be the Zodiacal signs the sun, the moon and 
the rest, the respirations. According to this method it is 
clear enough that Lalita also becomes breath, hence 
this name. (149) 

785. Worshipped by &&rtandabairava. (Martanda- 
bhairavaradhya.) 

In the Srlcbakra between 22nd and 23rd walls there is 
the devotee of Devi named Martandabhairava. The Lord 
of the teachers, Durvasa says in his La. Sta. Batna (100) : 
“ In my heart I adore Martandabhairava, decked with 
the jewelled crown, sporting with (his wife) Chchaya who 
is the energy which supplies light to the eye.” 

Or, Siva, in order to kill the Deitya called Manimalla, 
mounted a horse and descended to Earth, is called in the 
Maharashtra country by name Mallari and also by 
name Martandabhairava. The Tantrachintamani also repeats 
the same. The worship of Devi performed by him (S'iva) 
is described in the Mallari Mahatmya. 

Or, MWrt&nda, the Sun. The Skanda Pr. says : 
“ Because he was born from the inert egg (Mrita and Anda) 
he is called Martanda.” Bhairava means Vatuka and other 
different kinds. Concerning the worship of Devi by the sun. 



286 


tALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


the Padma Pr. says : ‘ ‘ The sun after worshipping daily a 
jewelled image of Devi obtained his pure divine lofty 
position.” As regards the worship by Bhairava, the Kaliku 
Pr. describes it at length. 

Or, Bhairava, womenhood (Bhlru, woman). The 
Marha. Pr. says, “ When you are remembered in times of 
difficulty you take away all fear of all beings.” 

Bhairava : according to the S'iva Stltra (1-5) “ effort 
is called Bhairava,” it is the sun (M&rtanda) because it 
destroys the darkness of confusion ; for. S'iva Sfttra (III-7) 
says : “ By conquering confusion, by the expansion of the 
endless, victory over innate knowledge.” The VartikakSra 
explains thus: “confusion means darkness, i.e., inborn 
egoism, by overcoming this, the Sun of effort is produced ; 
‘ endless ’ Samskaras (good mental tendencies) ; Expansion 
means the expansion of the Samskaras. To the Yogin who 
thus understands victory means attainment of the innate 
knowledge.” The meaning is Devi is to be attained by 
that rising sun-like effort which is called Bhairava. 

786. Who has entrusted her kingdom to Mantrinl. 
(Mantrinlnyastarajyadhfth.) 

Mantrinl, SyamalambS. The Brahma. Pr. says speak¬ 
ing about BajasySmala, “The care of the dominion and 
of the S'aktis of Lalita, the supreme ruler, all are in the 
power of Mantrinl.” 

Or, Mantrinl, those who worship (Devi) by Mantras, 
or Mantra is a pure thought, because it has the quality of 
protecting the man during meditation. Those who possess 
this are called Mantrins. Mantrinl, a certain effort which 
leads them to union with Bhagavatl ; in that effort depends 
the power of attaining universal dominion. The meaning 
is the attainment of unity by devotees and Yogins depends 
upon Devi alone. The S'iva Sutras (II-1-2 and 3) say : 
“ Thought is Mantra ; effort is the means ; knowledge is the 
body ; and manifestation is the secret of the Mantra.” The 
holy Krishnadasa explains the Sfltras as follows : “ Thought » 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 287 

by this the supreme truth of the Self is experienced. 
Thus the thought is the experience of the grace of the mani¬ 
fested Seif. Thought is Mantra. The same experience is 
thought secretly, i.e., IsVara and one’s own nature without 
distinction, hence it is called Mantra. It is called Mantra 
because through their teachers by the manifested qualities 
of the Self meditated upon, the complete egoism (Pflrna- 
hanta), and by the power of protecting through destruction 
of Samsara. The man attains equal mindedness by divine 
experience through the Mantra. The thought of the aspirant 
also is called Mantra for it has union with that quality. 
The effort of fixing the mind continuously on the Mantra 
just said above which has the quality of protecting the 
man during (meditation) is called Prayatna (effort). 
Prayatna means internal agitation ; this alone it means. 
Thus the man who practises the Mantra attains the unity 
with deity (the Self). The Yogin who practises thus 
obtains the power of the Mantra, which makes him for 
ever continue meditation on the POrniihanta as said above. 
Vidya. the experience of the highest unity. Body the 
divine hosts of words. Manifestation of the Pftrnahanta 
ip all directions. That is the meditation by the Mantras 
Which have the power of protecting one. Secret, that it is 
a secret to ordinary people.” Kshemaraja also comments 
at length on the above Sutras. 

787. Tripures 1 !. 

The deity of the Sarvasiipariptirakachakra is called 
Tripuresl. 

788. With victorious army. (Jayatsena.) 

Jayat, refers to the conquest of Bhanrfasura and 
others. Sena, her attendant S'aktis ; or Jayatsena is the 
name of a king. 

789. Devoid of the three qualities. (Nistraigunya.) 

790. Superior and inferior. (Parapara.) 

The S'ruti says, “ Brahman is the servant, Brahman is 
ferry-men ; and Brahman is these gamblers.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Or, Para, apara and parctpara : Para, others, apara, 
the Self ; or Para, foe, apara friend. The Bh. Gita 
(9-29) says, “ I have neither foe nor friend.” Para, he 
who is afar off, Apara he who is near.” Bh. Gita (13-15). 
“ I am far and near.” The Visva says, “ Para means 
superior, enemy, distance.” , 

(According to the Logic) the generality (Samanya) is 
threefold, viz ., para, apara, and par&para. 

Para and apara, the two forms of Brahman, the 
unconditioned and the conditioned. The S'ruti (Pra. Up., 
5-2.) : “ This is indeed, 0 Satyakama, is Para and Apara.” 
The Smr. also says, “ Two Brahmans are to be known one 
is Para and another is Apara.” Para (lit. posterior) 
quality, energy ; apara the thing qualified, i.e., Siva who 
is anterior. By the relation of equal essence Siva conjoin¬ 
ed with Sakti only is called Parabrahman. In the S'ruti 
“ I approach with salutations the Brahman, (Siva) the 
anterior of the two,” Siva is declared as prior to S'akti. 
In another S'ruti, “ This dawn posterior, the beloved of 
Heaven.” Sakti is described as next to Siva, Dawn, the 
Sakti, when she wanted to create, is praised as the dawn 
at the time of beginning of the creation. For further 
detail the reader is referred to the S'ivanandalaharl. 

Or Para and Apara, the twofold ether, or the twofold 
knowledge, as described in the Mund. Up. (1-1-4). The 
Linga Pr. also says, “ Two kinds of knowledge should 
be known, Para and Apara; Apara, 0 BrShmanas, are 
Rigveda, Yajus, SSman, and Atharvan which fulfils all 
objects, S'iksha, Kalpa, Grammar, Nirukta, Metre, 
Jyotisha. Para is said to be the imperishable one, which 
is invisible, intangible without family, caste, etc. . . . 
uncovered, that is, the Self. That is the Para knowledge 
and there is no other.” 

Pranava is twofold Para and Apara. Sti. Sam. says, 
“ The Pranava is said to be twofold by dividing Para and 
Apara. The Para is the highest Brahman characterised by 



LALITA S AH ASK AN AM A 


consciousness, bliss, etc. Because the supreme Brahman 
is naturally praised (Nava) much (Pra). The Apara Pranava 
is the -word very pure, as it is the cause of praise (of 
Brahman), it is called Pranava, or because it is the cause of 
obtaining the supreme Brahman.” 

Or the twofold meaning of the scriptures. The same 
book (4-2-2) says, “ The meaning of the scriptures is 
divided into Para and Apara. The Para means the supreme 
which is beyond (all the things). Apara is dharma, (religion) 
the means of obtaining the supreme.” 

Or in the Yoga S'astras also knowledge is divided into 
three—Para, Apara and Parapara. For it is said, “ Know¬ 
ledge, is said to be threefold by the division of f*ara, Apara, 
and Parapara. Of these, the first is the Supreme Knowledge 
and is the cause of cognising the Lord, the bondage, and 
the Self. The second, Apara knowledge is simply the 
cause of cognising bondage. The Parapara knowledge 
is, just as the change of the sight between a man and 
cat in the night, it does not distinguish the marks 
(Vilakshana).” 

Or the worship is also of three kinds, Para, Apara and 
ParSpara. The NityShridaya says, “Your worship 
described in the Nitya (Tantra) is declared to be of three 
kinds, 0 Gauii, Para, Apara, and Parapara. The first is 
the remaining in non-duality whatever method is practised ; 
the second is the worship by means of the (Sri) Chakra 
which I ever perform ; 0 Devi, full of wisdom, the third 
is worship of all the manifestations of Her.’’ 

Speech is twofold, Para and Apara. Again Apara 
is threefold, viz., Pasyanti, etc. (Madhyama and 
Vaikhari). 

Para and Apara are two states of consciousness. The 
first is the state common (to all the three), the Apara is 
threefold, viz., waking state, etc. (dreaming and sound 
sleep states). The Vijnanabhiravabha/ttaraka says, “ Wher¬ 
ever the mind goes whether externally or internally there, 



290 


LALITA SAHASEANAMA 


.0 dear one, it is supreme, there is the Para state on account 
of its all-pervading power.” 

Homa is also twofold, Para and Apara ; again the 
Apara homa is twofold, gross and subtle. The Svatantra 
Tr. says, “The fire in the MfllAdhara is the foundation of 
the ordinary gross homa. The subtle homa is the pranagni 
hotra ...” The Para homa is the state after the destruction 
of all dualistic interpretations respecting the known, the 
.knower and knowledge, “ The Para homa is said to be that 
which being absorbed, does not arise again, in the blaze of 
the great eternal fire of his own Self which burns for ever 
without fuel.” 

Pard^Hra is a certain mantra which is included in the 
Mantra Parayana. Devi is also threefold, Para, Apara and 
Parapara. The Yaraha Pr. says when speaking about the 
Trirotirtis : “The creative (energy) is said to be Para 
which has the white colour. Vaishnavl which is red and 
long-eyed is Apara. The Raudri (energy) is called 
Parapara. These three are attained by one who really 
knows Rudra.” ParO.pa.ra gives a four-syllabled mantra, 
this if added to the fifteen-syllabled, gives a nineteen- 
syllabled mantra ; if added to the sixteen-syllabled it gives 
a twenty-syllabled mantra. 1 

The other meanings of the word Parapara may also be 
added. (150) 

791. Truth, wisdom, and bliss. (Satyajnanananda- 
rOpa.) 

The S'rutis (Tai. Up., II-l) says, “ The Brahman is 
truth, wisdom, infinity.” (Bra. Up., 3-9-28) : “Brahman 
is'eternal, wisdom, bliss.” 

Or, Sati, true wisdom, Ajna, those who are ignorant of 
that, anCtnanda, such persons are without bliss ; Pupa, 
gives, i.e., she causes pain to those ignorant of the true 
wisdom. 

1 Here the commentator does not show the reason how the Para¬ 
para is to be taken as four. 



LAJjITA sahasranama 


291 


The Sruti flsla. 9 and Bra. Up., 4-4-10) says, “ Those 
who worship ignorance enter into deep darkness.” The 
Brahma. Pr. also says, “ The Aranya S'ruti condemns those 
who follow any but true knowledge.’’ 

Or, SatyajnAna : Sati, Devi, A.jnana, ignorant of— 
those who are ignorant of Devi, to those she assigns Rnpa, 
worlds called Ananda (devoid of bliss). The S'ruti (Br. 
Up., 4-4-11) says, “ Those worlds are called Ananda, which 
are covered with deep darkness, the ignorant and unwise 
men go to those worlds after death.” 

792. The supreme abode of the co-equal nature (of 
S'iva and S'akti). (S'3marasyapar3yan5.) 

The learned men (chandraloka, 1st slo.Psay, “We 
praise the ancient pair, the parents of the Universe. Each 
is the end attained by the penance of the other.” Kalidasa 
says : “ Siva (Devi) milks out the essence of the co-equal 
nature when the waves of the enjoyer, enjoyment, and 
the means are calm.” The S'ruti also says, “Equally 
pre-eminent, equally fundamental, both are equal.” 

Or, Samarasya, the worlds of Devas, with them, 
Par&yana, abode or refuge. 

Or, Rasy a, songs, Santa, Sama Veda songs, Pa.rayana, 
fond of. The Vis’va says “ Parayana means, fond of, devot¬ 
ed to, dependent.” 

793. Kapardinl. 

Ka, water, i.e., of Ganga, Pnra, the flow, da, sanctifies. 
His (Siva’s) matted hair sanctifies even the water of the 
Ganga. 

According to the commentator of the Stt. Sam., 
“ Kaparda means, earth, mockery, and praise.” Hence 
Kapardinl, greatly praised. 

Or, Kapardinl, decked with the garland of cow-dung 
cakes. When Siva incarnated as Mailara, his wife called 
Mahalasa, was decked with a garland of cow-dung cakes. 
The Vis'va says, “ Kaparda means the matted hair of Siva 
and cow-dung cakes.” 



292 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


According to Devi Pr. Kapardin! is the wife of Kaparda 
(S'iva), a deity worshipped at Chagalantta, one of the sixty- 
eight sacred places. 

794. Garland of the Kalas (sixty-four arts). (KalamSlS.) 

Kala, beauty, rna, brilliance, la, possessed of. 

795. The cow of plenty. (Kamadhuk.) 

That is, she fulfils all desires. Or she is the celestial 
cow (Kamadhenu). The S'ruti says, “ May we be attended 
by that cow and by speech which confer strength.” 

796. The desire. (Kamarfipinl.) 

Kama, the supreme S'iva. The Kames'vara is he who 
desires to .-create the Universe as described in the S'ruti 
(Tai. Up.,arl, 5), “He desired, let me become many, let 
me create beings.’’ About whom the Br. Up., (8-9-11) 
speaks, “He is the Person consisting of desire, it is He, 0 
S'akalya, who is His deity ? He replied, woman is His 
deity.” 

Or, Kama, at will, rnpa, forms—she assumes any 
form at will (or her forms are very agreeable). (151) 

797. Reservoir of science. (Kal&nidhih.) 

Kalas are described before (see com. on name 236). 

Kalas are Jivas. The Br. Up. (1-5-15) says, “The 
Atman is the sixteenth Kala of him.” Kalanidhi may 
mean the moon’s disc. 

According to the S'iva Shtra (I. 3) “. . . Kala means 
body,” the commentator of this explains Kala means action 
(Karma) ; hence all actions end in her (.Nidhi) ; Bh. Gita 
(4-33), “All actions, 0 Partha, end in wisdom.” 

798. The poetic art. (Kavyakala.) 

‘ ■ KOtvya, the work of poets, which is divided into vari¬ 
ous ways, viz., Nataka Sakata, Bhana, Dima, Prahasana, 
etc., and also described in the Agni and other Prs. 

The Vishnu Pr. says, “ Whether they praise him by 
means of poems or by means of songs, all the words form 
part of the body of the great Vishnu, who assumed the 
form of sound.” 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


293 


Or, Raid,, tbe inspiration which produces poetry ; 
because as described in the Tantras variously, a certain 
kind of meditation confers the power of poetical composi¬ 
tion ; or Kavya, S'ukracharya, Kala called Amritasanjivini 
(the power of conferring immortality). 

799. Mistress of (every kind) of literary composition , 
(Rasajna). 

Rasa, ten modes of dramatic composition, viz., 
Sringara, etc. 

RasajnO, means also the sense of taste. 

800. Treasury of Rasa. (Rasas'evadhih.) 

Rasa, the nectar of Brahman. The S'ru&.(Tai. Up., 
2-6-1> : “ He is the Rasa, when this essence is (Stained one 
becomes blessed.” The Brahma. Pr. also says, ‘‘Rasa is 
the supreme Brahman, Rasa is the supreme way, Rasa is 
the giver of light to man. Rasa is said to be the seed. He 
is the Rasa, one having obtained the Rasa becomes blessed. 
This, on the authority of the Scriptures, Rasa represents 
the vital breath. Who can live or who can breath (without 
Him). Thus also S'ruti (Tai. Up., 2-6-1) speaks. Hence 0 
Agastya, Rasa is said to be both the vital breath and the giver 
of vital breath.” 

Thus ends in the Saubhagyabhaskara composed by 
Bhasurananda, the ninth Kala called Yis'va with eighth 
hundred. 


THE NINTH HUNDRED 

801. Nourished. (Pushia.) 

Because she is the possessor of the body consisting of 
thirty-six Tatvas, or possessed of many qualities, or by 
Brahmarasa, or by Brahmanas. The Smr. says, “ Brahman 
is nourished by Brahmanas.” The S'ruti also says, “ The 
old Brahman becomes old through Brahmanas.” 

802. Ancient. (Puratana.) 



294 


LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


Because she is the first of all. 

803. Worshipped. (Pojya.) 

She is to be worshipped by all, or to be attended. 

804. Lotus. (Pushkara.) 

Pushka , nourishment, rn, recover. Pushkara is the 
deity of Pushkara Tlrtha. As there is no difference between 
ra and la, Pushkala, means complete. 

805. Lotus-eyed. (Pushkarekshana.) 

The Vis'va says, “ Pushkara means lotus, ether, water, 
elephant’s trunk, end, herb, island, bird, place of pilgrim¬ 
age, a certain musical note, a bind of serpent, the drum, 
head, swosrchand a fruit called Khadgaphala.” 

According to the Padma Pr. Pushkara, is a certain 
planetary conjunction. When the sun is in the asterism 
called Yis'Skha, and the moon is in the Krittika, the 
conjunction is called Pushkara and it is very rare at the 
place of Pushkara.” Pushkara also means the earth. 
The Padma. Pr. says, “ The Devas call the pericarp of the 
lotus earth, the Saragurus (?'> in the lotus, they call divine 
mountains. The (upper) petals of the lotus became the 
Mlechcha country. The lower petals are the worlds of the 
serpents and the Daityas. Thus by the wish of N&rayana 
the earth came out from the lotus . . . Hence the 

earth is called Pushkara.” 

Kshana, festivity, or remaining inactive. The Amara 
(verse 431) says, “ Kshana means leisure, a division of 
time, festivity.” 

Pushkara. also means the Banian tree ; because Matsya 
Pr. says, “ Because there is a banian tree in the Pushkara 
ifeland hence it is called Pushkara.” The Vishnu Pr. says, 
“ The banian tree is in the Pushkara country, that is the 
supreme abode of Brahman.” The Sruti (Nri. Pa. Ta. Up., 
1-1) says, V That one Prajapati was in the banian-leaf.” 
Here, as he slept in the banian-leaf, Vishnu himself is 
called Pushkara, Ikshana, compassionate look—she beholds 
him’ with compassion. The De. BhSg. Pr. says, “ Adoration 



ISRAMAMA 


295 


to Vishnu in the form of a boy asleep on a banian-leaf . . . 
in a half verse it is said that Devi is the giver of all things.” 

Puahkura , water, Ikshtma, (she) looked. The S'ruti 
says, “ There are four Aps. (waters), namely, devas, men, 
manes and asuras.” (152) 

806. Supremest light. (Paramjyotik.) 

The Br. Up. (4-4-16) says, “ That is light of light.” 
“ Ka/ha Up. (5-15), “There no sun shines, nor moon, nor 
stars, nor these lightnings, nor the fire.” “The sun 
shines only when he is illumined bv Him.” (Chcha. Up., 
8-3-4) : “ The supreme light one attains.” Jyotis here 
means illuminator, for we see the same meaning given in 
such .places, “the illuminator of the mifflP . . .” 

(Br. Up., 3-9-10.) 

Paramjotiz is the eight-syllabled mantra described 
in the fifth chapter of the DakshiniUnOrti Sam. 

807, Supreme abode. (ParamdhSma.) 

Dh&nta, light. The Bh. Gita (15-6), “The sun 
never illumines That, nor moon, nor fire. After reaching 
it when one does not return, that is my supreme abode.” 

DhCtma, the states of consciousness, Para, beyond— 
she is beyond the states of consciousness. GaudapSdacharya 
(1-5), “ The man who knows both the object of enjoy¬ 
ment as well as the enjoyer is never stained though he 
enjoys in the three states.” The Sota Samhita (4-11-32 
and 33) says, “He who knows the three states, namely, 
waking, dreaming, and sleeping, he is the Self, that is not 
the object, the object is super-imposed upon that. I take 
refuge in the supreme abode which is the evidence of the 
three abodes, characterised by reality, wisdom, bliss, etc.,- 
and is the meaning of the word ‘ I 

Dhama abode. The S'ruti (Katha. Up., 3-9) says, 
“That is the supreme abode of Vishnu.” The Korina 
Pr. also says, “ My energy is, Mahas'varl, Gaurl, spotless, 
tranquil, reality, knowledge, bliss, the supreme abode. 
Thus the S'ruti says.” 



296 


LALITA SAHASItAKAMA 


808. Supreme atom. (Paramanuh.) 

The Sruti (Kafha. Up., 2-20) “ More subtle than the 
atom,” that is, difficult to know. 

The Param&nns (primordial matter) of Logicians are 
her forms. Or, Parama, supreme, arm, mantra. 

809. The supremest of the supreme. (Paratpara.) 

She is supreme over Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. 

Or, Para, the age of Brahma—she is beyond that. 

. The Kali Pr. says, “ The day and night to the Brahma 
is called Para, the half of that is called Parardha. Such 
is the day to the Lord, so also the night. He who-is 
grosser than the gross and subtler than the subtle has 
neither d&yjmr night, nor years.” 

810. Bearing a noose in her hand. (Pas'ahasta.) 

The noose is in her left lower hand ; or she removes 
the bonds (Pash) with her hand. 

811. Destroyer of the noose. (Pas’ahantri.) 

The Harivams'a says, “ When she had burst the bonds 
of Anirudha who was bound by the serpent-noose, which 
was like a thunderbolt, who was distressed in mind, 
she addressed him, offering to confer boons on him, 
etc.” 

812. Destroyer of- hostile charms. (Paramantravi- 
bhedini.) 

Para, those who hate her devotees, i.e.. Kings ; 
mantra, certain energies which are included in the three 
energies, viz., the energy of lordship (Prabhus'akti), 
council (Mantras'akti) and armed force (Ustahas’akti). 

Or, Para, by enemies, mantra, the magical charms, 
or the mantras of the magical weapons. The Harivams'a, 
when Indra sends words about Pradyumna, says, “ To 
destroy that weapon you must now remember Devi.” * 

Or, Para, superior, mantra, the fifteen-syllabled 
mantra, Vibhedi.nl, (she) divides into twelve kinds. For 
it is said in the Tantras “ Manu, Chandra, Kubera, 
LopSmudra, Manmatha, Agastya, Agni, Sfirya, Nandi, 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


297 


Skanda. Siva and Krodhabha«araka (DurvSsa), these 
twelve are the devotees of Devi.” 

Para, superior, Mantri, those who meditate (on 
Devi), avi their sins, Bhedinl, destroys. The Linga 
Pr. says, “The word avi in the scriptures means sins, 
say the Brahmanas. It is called Avimukta (freed from 
sins) because it is freed from that (sin) and freed also 
from illusion.” (153) 

813. Shapely. (Mflrta.) 

814. Shapeless. (Amllrta.) 

That which has form is called Mftrta. (Earth, water 
and fire) ; Amilrta means air and ethergsthich are 
formless. 'SP 

Or, Marta, the five gross elements mingled with each 
other ; amfirta, the subtle elements which are not mingled 
with each other. For we see the above two explanations 
given by the com. in the S'ruti (Br. Up., 2-3-1), “ Brahman 
has two forms, Mttrta and Amllrta.” 

Or, Marta, Univese, amilrta. Brahman. The Vishnu Pr. 
says, “ That Brahman has two forms, Mhrta and Amilrta, 
these two respectively perishable and imperishable and both 
are in all beings. The imperishable is the ever 
remaining Brahman, the perishable is the whole Universe.” 
The Logicians explain the word mfirta that which has 
motion, but we should not adopt their theory as it has no 
foundation. 

815. Satisfied with the perishable (offerings). (Anitya- 
tripts.) 

Because she is pleased only by devotion. 

Or, aniti, (lit. breath) Jivas, atripta, not satisfied. 
Because in the S'ruti (Ka/ha. Up., 2-25) it is said, “ That 
both Brahmana and Kshatriya are Its food.” 

Or she is pleased with everything (Na-iti. atripta ; 
here two negatives make the ordinary meaning forcible). 
The Bh. Gita (9-26), “ He who offers with devotion a leaf, 
a flower, a fruit, or water, I accept from the striving Self.” 



298 I.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 

The meaning is whatever is given with devotion gives her 
satisfaction. 

816. The swan of the Msnasa lake of the Muni’s 
mind. (Muni man asa h a m s ik 5.) 

Or, Muni, of Munis, Mann, to please, Sahamsika, (lit. 
a dancer with bangles on the ankles), i.e., she takes delight 
in pleasing the Munis. 

817. Of fixed vows. (Satyavrata.) 

Satya, Brahman alone, Vrata dear ; or Satya truth 
alone is her vow. The meaning is she is attained by the 
vow of observing the utterances of truth. 

Or, /Satya, giving result quickly, Vrata, such are 
vows toMior. The Vi. Bhag. Pr. (Book 10) says, “ To 
attain Krishna, the cowherd girls made a vow to Devi and 
quickly obtained their desired objects.” 

Or, Satyavrata means what S'rl Rama said (in the 
Ramayana VI), “ One who once approaches me, with a 
request ‘ I am yours,’ on him I confer fearlessness from 
all beings. This is my vow.” 

According to the S'iva Sutra (III, 27) The cure of the 
body is a vow.” (Satyavrata.) The commentator says, 
“ To take care of the body which is filled with the nectar 
of devotion to Siva is a vow, that should be performed, 
hence the care of the body Should not be neglected.” 
Such a vow is necessary. Hence BhaMotpala asks for 
bodily health in these words : “ May this body, nourished 

by the nectar derived from the pure S’akti (another 
reading from pure devotion) manifested in me, remain 
long to enjoy thy worship.” 

■ ■ Satyavrata is a BrShmana who frightened by a boar 
exclaimed, ai, ai, and through his penance became a 
devotee of Devi and a great poet. This story is related in 
the De. Bhag. Pr. (Book III) : “ There was a BrShmana 
named Satyavrata, illiterate, very foolish, hearing the 
syllable from the mouth of the boar, and repeating from 
that time this syallable without the final m, in course of 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


299 


time became the best of the wise. By his merely uttering 
the word ai, Devi became pleased and made him the king 
of poets, etc. 

818. Reality. (Satyarttpa.) 

Satya that which persists throughout the three times. 
8atya, truth, ritpci, protects. The Bahvarchas say, 
“ Satya and Asatya are t ,vo. opposites, of these two, Satya 
is that which is direct, that Soma (S'iva with Uma Dev!) 
cherishes, and lie destroys the other (Asatya).” 

819. Pervading all hearts. (SarvantaryAmini.) 

Sarva, all beings, anta, the senses, yamini, directs. 

The S'rnti (Br. Up., 3-7-3): ."This is thy Sgkwhich is 
svithi* all and is immortal.” The Man. ajr (G) also 
says, " This is within all and is the origin of all.” 

Or, Sarva, all and antarydniini, entered in all, i.e., 
she is all in all and entered in all. The S'ruti says (Tai. 
Up., 2-6-1) : “ Having created that, he entered into it, 
after entering it, he became animate and inanimate.” 
The Smriti also gives explanation to the word Sarva 
thus : " Because She always knows the beginning and the 
end of everything and as she creates being and non-being, 
She is called sarva.” 

820. Faithful spouse. (Sati.) 

Or, Sati, reality. This is the name of the daughter of 
Daksha. The Brahma. Pr. says concerning the daughter of 
the Himavat, “ She, who was before, Devi, the faithful 
spouse (Sati), became Um5, she ever dwells with S'iva and 
he is never deserted by her.” (154) 

821. Brahmanl. 

Brahma ; ani tail (of a bird). She is the Brahman 
which forms the tail of the Anandamaya sheath (compared 
to a bird ; see Yed. Sfttra, 1-1-12 to 19). 

Or, Brahma, ani gives life—she gives life to BrahmA. 
The Devi Pr. says, ‘‘ She is called BrahmAxI because she 
creates or gives life to Brahma.” 

Or, Brahma, the grandsire and she is his spouse. 




300 


LAL1TA SAHA8RANAMA 


822. Brahman. 

That which is to be attained by liberated sools ; or 
Brahman, is the knowledge of the undifferentiated Self. 
The Vishnu Pr. says, “ That knowledge is called Brahman 
which annihilates duality, mere being, transcending speech, 
cognised by the Self alone.” 

823. The mother. (Janani.) 

She is the creator of the whole Universe. This name 
may be compiled with the previous name as ‘ Brahma- 
jananl 

824. Of manifold form. (BahurOpa.) 

The Bhag. Pr. says, “ She is formless because she 
is snprefoly 1 she is many formed because of her activity.” 
Though she is of the nature of Para Brahman she is the 
agent of action, such as the slaying of Bhandasura, etc. As 
she assumes such forms she is said to be many formed. 
The Gaudapada Stltru (8) says, “ Though one, she becomes 
many in order to destroy Bhandasura.” The Devi Pr. also, 
“ Her forms are many, immovable and movable,—devas, 
men, animals, hence Devi is called many formed.” Sd. 
Sam. (4-47-64) says, “ I adore Her who is the supremest of 
the supreme, who is one and two, and sixteen and thirty- 
two.” Tivo, may mean vowel and consonant. The vowels 
are sixteteen and consonants are thirty-tw'o. La and La, are 
the same ; Ha is the root of all and is not counted among the 
consonants, but properly speaking the consonants are 
thirty-three. Ha is the beginning syllable of this Sahasra- 
nama (Hayagrlva . . .) it is the origin of all and therefore the 
number is thirty-two. The De. Bhag. Pr. says, “ Lakshint 
(the syllable Ha) shines like a dancer through the manifesta¬ 
tion of speech.” The Vamana Pr. also, “ This Universe is 
known as manifold, she is everywhere, hence Sava is said 
to be many formed.” 

Or, Bahurfipa : she is the wife of the countless Rudras 
as described, in the Sruti (Rudradhyaya), “ There are 
countless Rudras in the world,’’ she is many formed. The 




IALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Varaha Pr., “ The dark (Tamas) energy called RandrI is 
said to be ChSmunda. There are nine crores of different 
Chamunrias. The Rajasi, passionate energy, the protector 
of the Universe, called Vaishnavl, has differentiated into 
eighteen crores of energies. The energy of Brahma belong¬ 
ing to Satva is said to be infinite in n umber, of all these 
energies, 0 earth, the divine Rudra is the husband as he is 
in all. All these great energies are forms created by S'iva, 
and he attends to all as their husband. One who worships 
these (energies), Rudra becomes pleased with him ; these 
energies are also delighted with him ; of this there is no 
doubt.” Concerning these things the Nrisimha-yPr. says, 
“ UrnS alone in many forms is the wife (of all Informs of 
S'iva).” The Tripura siddhanta also, “ 0 fair-faced one, 
Lopamudra, Saubhagya, and the great Vidya, the sixteen- 
syllabled one, are said to be the wives of Paras'iva. 0 be¬ 
loved one, Syamala, S’uddhavidya, Hayamdha, Para, are 
said to be the wives of Sadas'iva. Mahardha, Dvadasardha, 
Varahi, Bagalamukhi, Turlya, Bhuvanesl, the supreme 
Sambhavl, listen to me, are the wives of Rudra. Tiraska- 
rinl, Lakshmi, Mis’ra, Kamakala, are said to be the wives of 
Vishnu, and AnnapflrnI to S'iva. VagvadinI, and Bala are 
the wives to Brahma. The Navadfttis, Hasanti, the deities 
of Navasiddhas, these and other many energies are your 
forms.” Similarly the meaning of the name Bahurtlpa is 
variously given in every Purana, in every Upapurana, in 
every Tantra, but is here omitted to avoid prolixity. 

825. Adored by the wise. (Budharchita.) 

The Bh. Gita (7-16) says, “ 0 Arjuna, good men of 
four kinds worship me, he who is in trouble, he who 
desires knowledge, he who desires wealth, and the 
wise man.” 

826. Creator. (Prasavitrl.) 

Mother of the world consisting of ether, etc., or of the 
people. The Vi. Dharmottara says, “ Because she generates 
the beings she is called Savita.” The Bhagavatl Pr. also, 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


“ Prom her proceeded all things from Brahma to the 
inanimate creation and the Universe also proceeded from 
her, from Mahat to substance, I adore that supreme 
mother.” 

29th verse divides 49 names. 

827. Wrathful. (Prachanda.) 

The S'ruti (Tai. Up., 2-8-1) “ For fear of Him the wind 
blows.” Kamandaka also says, “How can one without 
possessing a moiety of anger and whom the people do not 
fear enforce righteousness ? ” Since she inspires fear the 
S'ruti (Katha. Up., 6-2) says, “ It is a great terror, a raised 
thunderbolt.” In the Yed. Shtra (1-3-39) ‘ the thunderbolt ’ 
is explaihejl' as Brahman. 

Or, Pra, fond of, chanda, a kind of flower called 
S'ankha flower ; PrachandA, shining one. The Vis'va says, 
“ Chanda means, a kind of perfume (Dhanahari), the 
Sankha flower, anger, and Prachanda means Durvalia, a 
kind of white Karavlra, and a brilliant man.” 

828. Ordinance. (Ajnu.) 

The desire of the Lord in the form of command and 
prohibition as expressed in the Vedas. So in the Linga 
Pr. S'iva says, “ For she is not to be considered to be 
Prakriti (matter) nor Jiva (life), nor Vikriti (a second¬ 
ary product). My eternal five-faced, holy ordinance 
which delivers the world from fear, proceeded of 
old from my mouth.” The S'iva Pr. also, “ Through 
this established divine ordinance of Rudra alone comes 
salvation.” 

Or this name may be taken as ‘ Jna,’ the knower—She 
is the person who is the enjoyer of the Guwas : The Linga Pr. 
says : “ They say that by the word jna is meant the Person, 
the enjoyer of Gunas.” According to Kos'a “ Jna means 
Brahma, Mercury and a wise man.” The S'ruti (Sve. Up., 
6-2) “ Jna is the death of the death, possessed of attributes, 
omniscient.” 

829. Foundation. (Pratishtha.) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


303 


Because she is the foundation of the whole Universe. 
The S'ruti says, “ She is the foundation of the extended 
Universe.” The Sfl. Sam. (Br. Gita, 3-2S> also : “ This 
supreme consciousness is the foundation of all things.” 
The sixteen-syllabled metre is also called Pratish/fha. 

A certain Kalit which resides in the water Tatva is also 
called Pratishfha ; the S'aivagama gives its characteristics 
thus : “ That Kal5 which gives ‘manhood and which 
increases the devotion to S'iva is called Pratishfha which 
establishes one firmly (in the Lord).” The VisVa says, 
“ Pratishiha means importance of the attainment of Yoga 
and the four-syllabled division (i.e., one-fourth part of a 
verse).” # 

830. Of form experienced. (Prakafctkritih.) 

Prakata, experienced by all, akriti, her nature. The 

Stt. Sam. (1-8-36), “ All men know Him as the idea of ‘ I ’ 
yet through delusion they do not recognise him as S'iva.” 

Prakaias are the Yoginls established in the first circle 
(of the S'richakra ), Akriti they are Her form. 

Some take it as a-prakafa meaning—secret or ap, in 
tvater praknta, manifested. The S'ruti says (Maha Na Up., 
14-1) “ All this was indeed water.” (155) 

831. Lord of senses. (PrSnes'vari.) 

Prcma, senses, in the Yed. Sfltra (2-4-14) “ There is 
guidance of prawas by fire, etc.,’’ it is established by dis¬ 
cussion, the existence of the ruling deity. Prana, the five 
vital breaths. The S'ruti says, “ He is the breath of 
breath.” Or Pra exalted, ana Yedas. The S’ruti (Kafha Up., 
2-15) says, “ All Vedas point out the same abode.” 

832. Nonrisher of senses. (Pranadhatrl.) 

The vivifier of all the Universe. 

Prana, the eleven senses (including mind). In the 
passage of the S'rnti, “ All the pranas follow the prana when 
it goes out,” p/“a/<a is explained to mean the senses. The 
same explanation is given also in the Ved. Sotra (II-4-5) : 
“ The pranas are seven, on account of this being understood 



304 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


from scriptural passages and of the specification of those 
seven.” 

833. Fifty Seats. (Panchas^tpltharfipinl.) 

Pranch&mt,, (fifty) : the expression here generally 

stands for fifty-one. Hence Harshadikshita in commenting 
on the first verse of the Saradatilaka ‘ His body is eternal 4 
bliss, etc.,’ explains fifty as fifty-one. 

The fifty-one Seats (PKhas) are from KSmarOpa to 
ChchSya chchatra. (See Yoginihridaya for the 51 names 
3-40 to 46). Therefore in the PUhanyasa which is included 
in the Sho<Mia nyasa, the fifty-one PPhas are mentioned. 
The Brahma. Pr. says clearly on this point: “Then must be 
orderly Igt^blished the fifty-one Pifhas . , . Those (PUhas) 
possessed with the order of letters should be established 
in their (proper) places of letters.” The Yoginihridaya 
(3-39 to 46) also says, “ 0 beloved one, one should 
establish the Pithas in the places of divine letters (Matri- 
kas) . . . These phhas are said to be the forms of letters.” 
Thus by saying that the PUhas are the places of letters, 
it is explained clearly that the pithas are fifty-one. In the 
commentaries on the above works it is explained that the 
alphabet from A to Ksha is to be established in each place 
and the Nyasa of the PMlias should be performed in each 
place of them (letters). The author of the Sundarlma- 
hodaya says that the Phhas are only fifty, having the 
syllable Ksha out of count. This is wrong because the 
above quotations (from Jnanarnava, etc.) regulate the 
PifAas according to the Matrikas. 

834. Unfettered. (VisTinkhala.) 

S'rinkhala, fetters, the bondage of action, etc., as 
they are the cause of bondage. So great men say, “ 0 
Lord, destroy my good actions as well as my bad actions -, 
when the fetters are on the feet it makes no difference 
whether they are of gold or iron.” The meaning 
is that ordinances and prohibitions only 4 apply to the 
ignorant. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


305. 


Or, Vifrinkhala, naked. Because at Alambura and 
other sacred- places Devi is seen in that form. 

835. Abiding in lonely places. (Viviktastha.) 

Vivikta, according to the Kos'a means, lonely and 

holy places. The Harlta Smr. says, “ The ground is 
everywhere holy where no people are seen.” Even an in¬ 
habited region becomes sanctified. Though the word' 
Vivikta, means both the region of righteous people as well’ 
as an uninhabited place, it here means lonely place ; 
because neither in a bad nor in a crowded place do we 
find a tendency to meditation. 

Or, Vivikta, those who are able to dktpi'immat.e 
between self and not-self ; Stha, she residw in such 
persons. 

836. Mother of warriors. (Vlramata.) 

Vlra, chief among devotees, or those slain in battle, 
Mother because she benefits them. 

Viru, according to Vis’va, means, the vessel which 
contains the mead, Mata, measurer. Vlra is a name of 
Ganes'a. In the Padma Pr. S’iva when speaking about 
Vlra says, “This Vlra, 0 Devi, is always dear to my 
heart, he is the teacher of wonderful feats, he is wor¬ 
shipped by multitudes of Ganes’as.” After hearing this 
Devi replies, “I desire to have such a son, 0 PurSntaka, 
when shall I see such a bliss-conferring son ? ” Then 
S'iva says, “ Let this man be thy son, who is pleasing in 
our eyes. Through you that son will become accomplish¬ 
ed.” Sttta said : “ Thus having spoken, she, the daughter 
of the Himavat, delighted, sent Vijaya, (her servant) to- 
quickly fetch Vlra.” 

837. Mother of the ether. (Viyatprastih.) 

The Srnti (Tai. Up., 2-1): “The ether is originated 
from the Self." (156) 

838. Giver of salvation. (Mnkunda.) 

Mukunda is Vishnu. The Tantra Raja says when 
describing the different Gopala mantras : “ The first Lalitfi 



306 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


onco appeared in a male body as Krishna ; She left the 
world uncontrolled as she slept and became inactive. 
Then she was surrounded by her own energies in the 
form of Gopts, in order to sport with them she divided 
her form into six, etc.” Mukunda means also a precious 
■stone. 

839. Abode of salvation. (MuktinilayA) 

There are five kinds of salvations. 

840. Whose body is the root. (MttlavigraharQpini.) 

Mulavigraha, the Rajarajes'varl S'akti, which is the 

root of all other energies such as Bala, Bagala, etc. So 
there are _ ten SOtras in the Gaudapada S&tras which treat 
of this .KJ The Stttra 2 describes threefold division of 
the same one Vidya, viz., ' S'ambhavl, Vidya and S'yama,’ 
and it is described in the succeeding Sfttras that each of 
these three produces many different energies. 

841. Knower of thought. (Bhavajna.) 

Amara (verse 476) says, “ Bhava means existence, 
nature, idea (or intention), action. Self, birth ” ; the 
Amaras'esha adds, ‘ womb, sage, wealth, compassion, sport, 
dominion.’ According to the SQtra, Bhava means Dharma ; 
according to a passage in the Smriti, (the stories chiefly 
dwell on the Bhava) means meditation. The root (Bhfi.) 
means the pure unconditioned one. Yaska says, Bhava 
means the six kinds of modifications, viz., being, birth, 
growth, etc. (Nirukta 1-1-3). The six categories of the 
logicians are also called Bhavas. Bhava, those who are 
involved in earthly existence (Bhava), or Bhava, the 
followers of Bhava (Siva) ; Bhava, also means devotion 
according to the Panini Stltra (4-3-95). Bha, means light, 
va, to go, i.e ;, the Sun and other luminaries depend on 
Her ; the Bhava means also the first interpretation of the 
six interpretations of the mantras as given in the Yoginl- 
hridaya (2-15). 1 

1 The six meanings are Bhivartha, Sampradayartha, Nigarbha, 
Kaulika, Sarvarahasya and Mahatatvartha. 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 307 

842. Destroyer of earthly existence. (Bhavarogaghni.) 

The RamSyana (Book YII) : “I see no medicine 

except Vrishafihadhvaja. (S'iva, lit. the bull on the flag).” 
The S'iva Pr. also says, “Just as the remedy for all 
diseases is naturally in opposition, so S'iva is foe of the 
pains of SamsSra.” 

843. Turning the wheel of earthly existence. 
(Bhavachakra pravartinl.) 

She turns the wheel of Samsara like a wheel. The 
Manu Smr. (12-124) says, “ He, pervading all the beings by 
the five forms and constantly making them, by means of 
birth, growth and decay revolves like a wheel.” The Vi. 
Bhag. »Pr. also, “ Thou art alone the Lord of t® bondage 
and release of the whole Universe. Wise men worship 
thee, Hari, the remover of pain of those who take refuge 
in thee.” 

Bhavachakra, the AnShatachakra, (heart) because it is, 
the place of Bhava (S'iva). 

A chakra is defined in the Tantras as consisting of 
angles and petals, in the AnShata there are no angular 
figures, how then can it be called a chakra ? Hence the 
saying (No. 485) “Residing in the Anahata, lotus.” For 
lotus is that which consists of petals alone, that which 
consist of angles alone is called Yantra, according to the 
Siddhanta (settled opinion). That is not so. The 
commentator of the Vidyaratna thus replies : the- 
Mflladhara and other centres are called chakras, but some 
apply the word chakra in a figurative sense by attributing 
angles to the petals. This is also wrong. If the petals 
are angular, they are not petals but angles and the figure 
is a Yantra. The meaning of the above commentator (of 
Vidykratna) is that as there are angles in the pericarp of 
these lotuses (Mflladhara, etc.) they are properly called 
chakras, like the Binduchakra, Ash/.adala, Shorfasadala, 
Vrittatraya and three Bhflgralias which are included in 
the S'rlchakra. 



308 


LAT.1TA SAH ASK AN AM A 


Or, Bhava, S'iva, Chakra, mind, Pruvartiril, she 
guides. For the Vishnu Pr. says, chakra, means mind. 
“ Vishnu hears in his hand mind in the form of disc 
(chakra) which is constantly in motion, swifter 
than wind.” (157) 

844. Prototype of the metres. (ChchandassarS.) 

Chchandas, according to the Paingala Tantra means 
Vedas ; or Gayatri, etc. The Vis'va says, “ Chchandas 
means metre, Veda, unrestrained conduct, desire, and 
Sara means strength, marrow, fixity, rule, water, wealth, 
superiority.” Here Chchandas, Veda, i.e., the Upanishad 
portions, Sara (fixity), her nature is established in the 
Upanishad. , 

Or, Chchandas is Gayatri and other metres, Sara, her 
form is fixed. Among the metres Gayatri is the essential 
one, the PanchadasI is its essence. Thus we said in our 
Varivasyarahasya (1-2 to 4) : “ For the sake of attaining 
that (knowledge) fourteen methods are promulgated in the 
world as means. Among these the Vedas are the essential, 
in them the Gayatri, of this there are two forms, of these 
the first is the one which is uttered by all, the other is 
completely concealed in the four Vedas, even the Veda 
Purusha (Veda personified) speaks out that Vidya 
by the use of symbolical words such as, ‘ Kama, Yoni, 
Kamala,’ and not openly.” The Tripura Up. (16) “ Kama, 
Yoni, Kamala, Vajrapani, Guha, Hasa, Mataris'va, Abhra, 
Indra, again Guha, Sakala, with Maya, thus is the ancient 
Vidya, the universal mother of the world.” This indicates 
the Kadividya (vide supra I. 17 com.). The Paingala Tantra 
s&ys, in two Sfltras . . . the complete S'richakra (Maha- 

prastara) is explained though there is an infinite number of 
words ; they are all included in this (Mahaprastara), as we 
have shown in our work, Chchandobhaskara. 

Chchandas also means the science of metres, Sara, 
greatness, i.e., Devi (is praised) by the Vaikharl form of 
speech. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 


309 


Or, Chchandas, unrestrained (mental) motion. The 
Vijn&nabhairavabha^araka says, “ Wherever the mind finds 
pleasure thither it is directed, this supreme bliss becomes 
manifest.” So according to this whatever gives the perfect 
devotee delight that is righteousness, whatever displeases 
him is unrighteousness. It is said in the Sakuntala (by 
Kalidasa in the prologue), “ In doubtful points the opinion 
of the wise is the authority.” The precepts of the Smritis 
are only binding up to the attainment of perfection (Prau- 
rfhollasa), for the Kalpa Stttra (of Paras'urama) says, 
“Ethical precepts (are to be observed) until perfection.” 
The same thing is meant by the Kaula Up. when it says, 
“ Righteousness is unrighteousness, unrighteousness is 
righteousness.” The Yoginihridaya also (3-208) says, 
“ Whether he drinks or dances or vomits or eats or medi¬ 
tates on the supreme unity, let him follow his own inclina¬ 
tions in peace.” The desired objects of those whose minds 
are absorbed in contemplation are necessarily righteous¬ 
ness. Hence the Smritis (Manu 2-6) say, “ Righteousness 
means what is ordained in the S'rutis and Smritis, 
the custom of holy men as well as that in which the 
mind delights,”—that is the mind devoted to con¬ 
templation—otherwise licence would be permitted ; Sara, 
rule. 

Chchandas , desire, Sara, permanent form, because 
Devi is in the form of Ichchas’akti. 

845. Essence of the scriptures. (Sastrasara.) 

This and the next name should be explained as the 
preceding one. 

S'astra, Vedas, for it is explained in the Ved. Sfltra (I- 
1-3) ‘ From its being the source of S'astra.’ The doctrine 
of the followers of Tantra also is that which lays down 
rules (Vidhi) is S'astra ; or S'astra, the Mlmamsa, etc., 
which follow the Vidhi S'astra. The Bhamati (the com. on 
S'rl S'an. Com. on the Ved. SO. by Vachasputi Mis’ra) says, 
“ That is called S'astra by which, whether revealed texts or 



310 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


otherwise (Veda or Smriti), men are instructed to act or to 
refrain.” 

846. Essence of the mantras. (MantrasSra.) 

Mantra, may mean, Vedas, or the Mantras in the 

Tantras, or the sixty-four books about Mantras. 

847. Slender waisted. (Talodarl.) 

If the syllable A be added the name becomes A-talodar! : 
the Atala loka is her waist when she assumes the Viraf form. 

848. Exalted fame. (Udlraklrtib.) 

Or, ud, exalted, a, all-pervading, ara, quickly obtained, 
Tclrti, fame, i.e., by worshipping Devi. The Kos'a (verse 
28) says, “Ara means lightness, quickness.” 

Or, r9, the mother of Devas, her sons are called aras, 
ud, beyond, klrti, fame, her fame excels that of the Devas. 

Or, ara, Mangala and other deities, ud, dispels, i.e., 
the utterances (of the name of Devil dispel the influence of 
the bad deities such as Mangala, etc. 

Or, ud, the golden Intelligence which resides in the 
disc of the Sun. The S'ruti (Chcha. Up., 1-6-6), “He that 
resides in the sun, the golden person . . . His name is 
Ud ” ; aras certain kinds of weapon, i.e., Her fame is a 
weapon against the Person in the sun. The meaning is by 
worshipping Her one obtains fame excelling the fame of 
that Person. 

Or, ara, the two lakes of nectar, ud, exalted, i.e ., Her 
fame is equal to that of the two lakes? This is explained 
in the S'ruti (Chcha. Up., 8-5-4) : “ In the city of Brahman, 
called Aparajita (unconquerable) to be obtained by those 
who worship the qualified Brahman, there are two lakes of 
ne'ctkr resembling oceans by name ara and nya.” The 
same is again explained by Aeharya also in the Ved. 
Sutra (4-4-22) : “ There is non-return according to 

Scriptures.” 

849. Her glory is exalted. (Uddamavaibhava.) 

Dama, rope, that which limits, ud, beyond. 

850. The Letters. (Varwarllpinl.) 



LAMIA SAHA SEAN AM A 311 

There are sixty-four letters these make up her form. 
The Paninis'ikshS says, * ‘ According to the S'ambhava 
school there are sixty-three-or sixty-four letters, these are 
promulgated by Svayambhu in the Prakrits or Samskrita 
Language.” (158) 

851. Bringing peace to men consumed by birth, death 
and decrepitude. (Janmamrityu jarstapta janavisianti 
dayinl.) 

Vis'rdnti, happiness in oneself. 

852. Proclaimed by all the Upanishads. (Sarvopani- 
shadudghushta.) 

Sarva (all), Aitareya and other Dps. Upanishad, 
secret, it is explained thus in the commentaries on (Chcha. 
Up., 1-1-10), “ For whatever one does by knowledge, faith, 
by Upanishad, that alone becomes very powerful.” The 
derivation of it is given by Acharya thus : “ Bringing the 
Self near (upa.) to Brahman, which is opposed to duality, 
and destroying ignorance (riishat) and what arises from it, 
hence it is called Upanishad.” 

Udghushta : ud, exalted, i.e.. Unity, ghushta, according 
to the Kosu * loudly proclaimed ’. The meaning is each 
Upanishad is ordained a different kind of worship without 
real difference. This is clearly explained in the Ved. Sti. 
(III-3-1) : “The cognitions intimated by all the Vedanta 
texts are identical on account of the non-difference of 
injunction and so Oh.” 

853. She is Kala called S'antyatita. (S'Snyatitakalat- 
mika.) 

The Kala in the ether is called S'antyatita. The 
Saivagamas describe its nature thus: “ S'antyatitakala 
annihilates duality and bestows bliss.” (159) 

854. Fathomless. (Gambhira.) 

Gambhira is the large tank (Mahahrada). The Siva 
Stitra (1,23) says, “By meditating on Mahahrada (one 
derives) the experience of the power of the Mantra.” The 
commentary : “ Mahahrada means the supreme Divine 



312 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


energy. Meditation (Anusandbilna) means the feeling of 
being merged in that. Mantravlrya (the power of Mantra), 
the cognition of the POrn&hantfl (complete egoism).” 
“ Anubhava (experience), the clear manifestation, of the 
Self.” In another place also, “ The supreme queen is 
knowledge. She emanates first the energy of desire and 
then gross objects as well as souls with their qualities of 
activity, purity, and infinity, etc. Hence Mahahrada 
means Devi who pervades the Universe and is beyond 
space and time.” 

Or, Gam, the Ganapatibija, i.e., Ganapati, bhi, fear, ra 
drives out. 

855. Residing in the ether. (Gaganantastha.) . 

Gagana, ether in the heart, or the elemental ether, or 

the Supreme Ether. The S'ruti Sve. Up. (3-9) says, “ She 
is the one abiding like a firm tree, in the sky.” 

Or, Gagana, ether, ant a, its destruction, stha, she 
remains (even after the destruction of the ether). 

Or, Gagana, the syllable Ha, Antantht, the syllables, 
Ya, Ra, La and Va, these represent the bijas of the five 
elements. 

856. Proud. (Garvita.) 

Supreme egoism concerning the creation of the 
Universe. 

857. Delighting in the songs. (Ganalolupa.) 

Gana, consists of four things, viz., Tata, Anaddha, 

Ghana and Sushira. 

Gana, is a musical instrument, or one of the two kinds 
of Sama (of Samaveda), S'arira, or Gandharva. 

‘ 858. Free from imaginary (attributes). (Kalpana- 

rahita.) 

Katpana, the waves of the objective world, because 
they are only imagined. 

Or, Rat pa, even in the Pralaya, N&ra to men hit a, 
friend. Nara, Brahman. For it is said “ As he is the 
leader (Nayati), hence the eternal Brahman is called Nara.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


313 


The Souls are called Naras because they belong to Nara, 
Mta, in the time of universal dissolution she does good to 
souls by keeping them in her belly in the form of Vasanas 
(tendencies). In the time of creation and preservation 
there is no need to the question her benevolence. The 
AslVhuvakragita says, “In me who am the infinite ocean 
of consciousness, the souls like waves naturally rise, beat, 
play and return ; wonderful.” 

859. Goal. (Kftsh/ha.) 

The period of time consisting of eighteen minutes is 
called Kashtha, also it means Daruharidra (a piece of 
certain wood). 

Kdshtha is the final doctrine set forth by the Vedanta 
passages. The So. Sam. says, “Whether visible or 
invisible, real or unreal it is the supreme S'iva. Thus the 
final declaration of the Vedanta passages is called KaslVha.” 
The S'ruti (Kartia Up., 3-11) : “ She is the goal, she is the 
supreme way.” 

Kashtha is the wife of the supreme S'iva in the form 
of the ether called Bhlma, and the mother of heaven. 
The Linga Pr. says, “ The divine S'iva called Bhlma in the 
form of ether giving space for all things animate and 
inanimate. The wife of this glorious divine, supreme 
Bhima, is called Kashtha, Svarga (heaven) is their son.” 
The Vayu Pr. also repeats the same. 

Kashtha, as she stands after crossing. The S'ruti (S've. 
Up., 3-14) says, “He stood ten inches beyond.” The Bh. 
Gita (10-42), “ I do abide by a portion prevailing this 
entire Universe.” 

860. End of sin. (Akanta.) 

• Aka, sin and pain. 

861. Having the half body of her husband. (Kantfir- 
dhavigraha.) 

Kanla, supreme S'iva. 

Kct, the syllable Tea-, anta, the end of it, /.<?., the 
syllable Kha, i.e., heaven, ardha, a division. The meaning 
40* 



314 


LAI.ITA sahaskanama 


is the heaven is a part of her body. The S'ruti (Chcha. 
Up., 3-12-6), “The Beings form only one portion of him, 
the three immortal portions are in heaven.” (160) 

862. Free from cause and effect. (KSrya kSrawa 
nirmukta.) 

Karya, the categories, Mahat, etc., karatia, Mola- 
prakriti. Because in the Chaitanya (Brahman) these things 
do not exist. The S'ruti says, “ He has neither cause nor 
effect.” 

863. Outflowing with desire and pleasure. (Kama- 

kelitarangits.) 

Kama, KSmes'vara. 

864. Wearing shining gold ear-rings. (Kanatkana- 

katatanks.) 

865. Having a body merely for the sake of alliance. 
(Lilavigrahadhar jnl.) 

Lila, without effort, Vigraha, different incarnations. 
Lila is the name of the queen of Padmaraja. She is 
mentioned in the Yogavasishfha: “ There was in this 
Royal family one named Padma ... he had a beautiful 
chaste wife named Lila.” (161) 

866. Unborn. (Aja.) 

The S'rutis (S've. Up., 4-5) : “ The one, unborn ; he 
was not born, will not be born.” The Mahabharata also, 
“ I was not, am not, and will not be born at any time, I 
am the Kshetrajna of all beings, hence I am called Aja.” 
For birth is always followed by death, for the Bh. Gita 
(2-27) says, “ Certain is the death of one who is born, 
certain also is birth of him who is dead.” 

‘ ‘ 867. Free from decay. (Kshayavinirmukta.) 

Kshaya, house, Vinirmukta, freed, i.e., those whcP 
obtain Salvation are seen while living as householders. 
The meaning is that their houses are abandoned from fear 
of worldly objects by those who desire salvation, but 
salvation is obtained by the devotees of Sundarl even 
while they are in their houses. We discussed this in our 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 315 

S'iva S'tuti. “ If you desire the supreme abode do not 
abandon your own abode ; remember in your heart the 
name of the foe of Kama, the way to Hie supreme abode.” 

868. Beautiful. (Mugdha.) 

Some prefix A making the name Amugdha, not 
ignorant, i.e., her devotees are not ignorants. The Vis’va 
says, “Mugdha means beautiful and ignorant.” 

869. Easily pleased. (Kshipraprasadini.) 

Kshipra, quickly, t>y a few days’ worship. For 

the Saura Pr. says, “ 0 Dvijas, by worshipping other 
deities salvation is gradually obtained, but by worshipping 
the Lord of Umu one is freed in the same incarnation.” 
This yefers to those who practise excessive devotion. 
For others the S'iva Pr. says, “Though he has only 
a little faith that mortal will not surely undergo the pain 
of the womb after the third birth.” Confirming the 
above, the Tantraraja says, “ The prayers, oblations, 
worship, etc., performed without regularity make one fit 
(for salvation) in the next birth.” 

870. ’ Worshipped internally. (Antarmiikhasama- 
radhya.) 

Antarmukha, introspection, i.e., worshipped by those 
capable of introspection. 

871. Difficult of attainment by those devoted to 
external objects. (Bahirmukhasudurlabha.) 

The Sau. La. (slo. 95) says, “ Difficult of attainment 
by those whose senses are wavering.” (162) 

872. Triple revelation. (Trayi.) 

That is the Big, Saman, and Yajur Vedas. In the 
Kflrma Pr. Devi says to Himavat: “I have another 
supreme ancient energy called Vedas, at the beginning of 
creation it appears as Big, Yajur and Saman.” The Padma 
Pr. also, “O Devi, thou art called logic, the three Vedas 
and ethics.” The Devi Pr. also says, “ Since Devi is in 
the three divisions of the Vedas, namely, Big, Yajur and 
Saman, she is in the supplementary scriptures, she is 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


called Trayl, the bestower of visible and invisible things.’' 
But the Nitya Tr. says, “ Samaveda begins with the syllable 
A. Rigveda also begins with A, the Yajarveda begins with 
I by uniting these three it becomes suchi fpure), listen 
while I explain the process. Having written down the 
three letters they should be joined according to grammati¬ 
cal rule. The Rig and Yajur should be joined in a guna 
diphthong, A x I becomes E (tt). This E should be joined 
to the last one (A) in a Vriddhi diphthong E, and A 
becomes AI (it). This AI is the body of suchi, hence she 
is called triple science by the union of cause and effect.” 
Here the word suchi, means the bija of the Vagbhava (the 
first division of the Panchadas'i). Therefore Trayl also 
means the Vagbhavablja. 

873. Abode of the three objects of desire. (Trivar- 
ganilaya.) 

Trivarga, Dharma, wealth, and desire or the three 
times, past, present, future, or A-TJ-M (of Prawava). 

874. Residing in the three. (Tristha.) 

Tri, the three worlds, etc. The Mark. Pr. says, “ There 
are three worlds, three Vedas, three vidyas, three fires, 
three lights, three objects of desire, viz., virtue, etc., three 
qualities, three sounds, three sins, three conditions of life, 
three times, three states of consciousness, three Pitris, day, 
night and twilight, three Matras, these 0 Devi, Sarasvatl, 
are thy form, hence thou art called Tristha.” 

875. Tripuramalinl. 

The goddess of the Antardas'arachakra. 

30th verse divides 38 names. 

• ■ 876. Free from disease. (Niramaya.) 

877. Without support. (Niralamba.) 

Because there is no support for that which supports 
all. Otherwise we obtain regression to infinity. 

878. Rejoicing in herself. (Svatmarama.) 

This name establishes her independence, since by it 
she is the destroyer of the root (t.e., matter.). The meaning 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


317 


of the description is, she divides herself into two and 
these sport with one another. The Br. Up. (1-4-3) 
says, “ He was not happy ; therefore the lonely one 
is never happy. He desired a second, and he became 
thus. He made himself a pair and they embraced 
as man and woman. So they became husband and 
wife.” 

Or, Svalman, herself alone, aramct, artificial garden, 
i.e., the various worlds are nothing but herself. Because 
in the time of creation and of destruction she herself alone 
remains. The Vayu Pr. says, “ She, one Lord through the 
energy of dominion, becomes many. Having become many 
She again becomes one.” 

Or Sva, Her’s, i.e., the Universe belongs to her, Atman, 
Brahman, drama sports. In these two she has power of 
wandering at will. The Mark. Pr. says, “ Thou art the 
supreme . and eternal Devi in whom all are established. 
Brahman is supreme and imperishable and the Universe is 
perishable. Just as the fire is in the fire stick and atoms 
m the earth, so remain Brahman and the whole Universe 
in thee.” 

879. Stream of nectar. (Sudhasrutih.) 

The nectar which is in the moon of the pericarp of the 
SahasrSra lotus flows through the Kunrfalint. The circles 
of the Dakin! and other deities are watered by this stream 
whence the KandalinI becomes the energy of action. 
Sudhlteruti may also mean the stream of nectar which flows 
from the moon’s disc and imparts energy to the Sun and to 
fire, etc. The Vayu Pr. says, “ The Devas become fat by 
drinking the fifteen streams of nectar which flow from the 
moon in the dark fortnight . . . All this is the Maya 

of SSambhavI.” 

Or Sudhteruti according to the Jnan.arnava means a 
kind of meditation on Devi causing flow of nectar and 
removing the poison, when one is aspiring to attain in the 
Sakti Bija. (163) 




318 


LALITA SAHABRANAMA 


880. Skilled in raising (those) sunk in the bay of the 
transmigatory life. (SamsSrapanka nirmagna samud- 
dharana pandits.) 

The Kttrma Pr. says, “ Those who once remember 
Devi invoking her protection do not fall into the endless 
ocean of SamsSra which is difficult to be crossed.’’ 

881. Fond of sacrifice. (Yajnapriyil.) 

Or Yajna, according to the S'ruti means Vishnu. 

882. Doer of sacrifice. (Yajnakartrl.) 

883. Sacrificer. (Yajamilnasvarflpin!.) 

One form of S'iva is Dlkshita (sacrificer) and his 
spouse is called Dtksha and the mother of Santana. The 
Linga and Vayu Prs. say, “ The seventh terrible form is 
the form of the Brahmanas, the sacrificer and his wife is 
called Diksha, and his son Santana.’’ Of S'iva’s eight forms 
the last is some times called the sacrificer and some¬ 
times Atman. This name in that case may be explained 
to mean both thus : t Yajam&na , the sacrificer. Sva, 
the Self, r&pa, both are her forms. The Linga Pr. 
says, “The five elements, the moon, Sun, and Self, the 
best of Munis say, are the eight forms of the Lord of 
Devas. The eighth form of him is self and also the 
sacrificer.” (.164) 

884. Supporter of Dharma. (Dharmadhara.) 

Dharma, the mode of life handed down in each 

country, by the tradition of the wise, and not contrary 
to the Vedas. The Samvarta Smr. says, “ In each 
country that rule of conduct which is handed down by 
tradition and is not contrary to the Vedas is distin¬ 
guished as Dharma.’’ A in all places, Dhara, flowing 
stream. 

Or Dharma is her support. Because the S'ruti (Maha 
Niira Up., 22-1) : “ Everything is established in Dharma.” 
Or by whom Dharma is supported, i.e., Dharma becomes 
the support of all things by Her. 

885. Ruler of wealth. (DhanSdhyaksha.) 



LAL1TA SAHASKANAMA 


319 


D/tanadhyaksha is Kubera. Because there is no 
difference between the worshipper (Kubera). and the 
worshipped (Devi). 

886. Increasing money and grain. (Dhanadhanyavi- 
vardhini.) 

887. Fond of Vipras. (Viprapriya.) 

Viprd, Brahmanas possessing a knowledge of the 
Vedas and other S'astras. The Br., Vaivarta Pr. says, “A 
Brahmana should be known by his birth. He is called 
Dvija, (twice born) on account of his purificatory 
ceremonies. He becomes a Vipra by knowledge. One 
who possesses all these there is called S'rotriya.” 

P.nya : for it is said, “Whether he is ignorant or 
learned the Brahmana is my body.’’ 

888. Of whom the Vipras are her manifestations. 
(Viprartlpa.) 

The S'ruti says, “ All the Devatas resides in Brahmana 
who knows the Vedas.’’ The Paras'ara Sma. also says, 
“ The Brahmanas are known in the three worlds as sacred 
places in motion, for by the flow of their speech sinful 
people are purified.” 

Or Vipra, Brahmanas, rupa, nourishes, i.e., by the 
repetition of mantras (of Devi) and homa (oblation), etc., 
Brahmanas are nourished.. The Apastamba Smr. says, 
“By disgrace their penance is increased, by adulation 
their penance is destroyed. If the Brahmana is adored 
and worshipped he becomes exhausted like a cow after 
milking. Just as the cow is nourished during the day by 
tender grass, so the Brahmana is nourished by repetition 
of the mantras and by homa.” 

889. Causing the revolution of the Universe. 
(VisVabhramanakarinl.) 

Vitva, all. the Brahmic eggs, bhramana, their creation, 
preservation, and destruction. The S'ruti (Sve. Up., 6-1), 
“ Some wise call it nature, some confused call it time, that 
by which the wheel of Brahman is revolved, is the glory 



320 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


of the Lord.” The Bh. Gita (18-61) also says, “ All beings 
which are fixed on the wheel of the Universe which he 
causes to revolve by his Maya.” 

Or Vixva, Vishnu ; for the word Visrva is explained 
thus when it occurs in the Vishnu Sahasranama, (.1st. Name) 
causing confusion to him. This story occurs in the Kalika 
Pr. : “Vishnu once travelling through the sky, mounted 
on his vehicle Garmfha, passed by the Devi named Kama 
residing in the Nllachala in the Kamarflpa country, without 
saluting her ; then by the fofee of her anger he fell 
into the ocean there he remained confused ; after a long 
time Lakshmi (his spouse) began to look for him, and 
hearing of this event from Narada, she appeased Devi, by 
penance and freed Vishnu from his confusion. Afterwards 
he worshipped Devi and went to VaikunfTia. • (165) 

890. Consumer of the universe. (Vis'vagrasa.) 

Visva , of all things animate and inanimate. The 

Kafha. Up. (2-25) says, “ The BrShmana and Kshatriya are 
both His food, death is His condiment, who is able to know 
where he is.” The Ved. (S&. 1-2-9) also confirms this : 
“ The eater (is the highest Self) since what is moveable and 
what is immoveable is mentioned (as his food).” 

891. Of the colour of coral. (Vidrumabha.) 

Or vit, knowledge, druma, tree (t.e., the tree of 
knowledge). 

892. Vaishnavl. 

The Devi Pr. says, “ She is sung as Vaishnavl (1) 
because she bears the conch, disc and club, (2) the mother of 
Vishnu, (3) and the destroyer of foes (of Hari) or (4) Vishnu 
himself.” In the above quotation four meanings are given. 

893. In the form of Vishnu. (Vishnurflpinl.) 

In the Brahma. Pr. in the Lalitopakhyana Devi says, 
“ My male form bewildering the milk-maids.” In the same 
place Vishnu says to Virabhadra, ‘ The ancient S'akti of the 
Lord is divided into four forms, that S'akti becomes 
BhavanI in its ordinary form (Bhoga), in battle she takes 



LAIMA SAHASRANAMA 


321 


the form of Durga ; in anger that of Kali ; and she is also 
sSy male form.” The Kttrma Pr. when Himavan praises 
Devi says, “ I salute thy form called Narayana, 0 Lalita, 
which has a thousand heads, which is of infinite energy, 
having a thousand arms, the ancient Person, reclining on 
the waters.” In the Karma Pr. when S'iva showed his 
universal form to Mankanaka, the latter said : “ What is 
this terrible form of thine, facing every side, who is she 
shining by your side ? ” Thus questioned S'iva after 
explaining the glory of his own nature, says, “ she is my 
supreme Maya and Prakriti of triple qualities. She is said 
by Munis to be the ancient womb of the Universe. He 
bewilders the Universe by the Maya, he is the knower 
of the Universe, Narayana, supreme, unmanifested, in the 
form of Maya, thus says the S'ruti.” In the Sanatkumara 
Sam. describing to the king Prabhakara, the devotion to 
Vishnu, and describing to his wife, Padmini, the devotion 
to Parvati, it is said: “ Janardana is thus in the form of 
Devi as well as in his own form, for the husband and wife 
being one production, the only one is worshipped as two.” 
The Br. Parashra Smr. also says, “ He who with delighted 
mind worships Durga, Katyayani, Vagdevatas’, obtains 
the world of Vishnu.” The Padma Pr. also, “ One who 
bathes the image of Chandika with the juice of the sugar¬ 
cane and places her on a golden vehicle, enjoys the presence 
of Vishnu (after death).” The Adilya and S'iva Prs., 
She who dwells by his side is the young Parvati and Hari 
also is a part of him.” The Vamana Pr. also says, 
“ One who on the full-moon day of the month Magha 
worships Devi according to rule, he obtains the benefit of 
the As'vamedha sacrifice and (after death) he shines in the 
world of Vishnu.” 

894. Without origin. (Ayonih.) 

Yoni, cause, or abode, because the S'ruti says, “I 
prepared a place of abode (Yoni) for thee, 0 India.” 
A-yoni , having no abode, i.e., unlimited. 

41* 



322 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Or A, Vishnu, Yoni, mother, i.e., the mother of Vishnu. 

895. The place of origin. (YoninilayS.) 0 

Youi, Prakriti ; for it is explained thus in the S'ruti 
(Mun. Up., 3-1-3), “ Doer, Lord, the Person, Brahman, 
Yoni.” The commentary : ‘ Doer,' possessing the 

energy of action, Lord, the director, Person, the Self, 
Brahman full, complete, Yoni, Prakriti. Thus by 
meditation they perceived. The Ved. Sfltra (1-4-27) : 
“ He is Yoni (material cause) also for the scriptures say so.” 

Or Yoni, Mava. It is explained • thus in the S'ruti 
(S've. Up., 4-11), “ He who presides over the Yoni 

(Maya).” Nilaya, limits, i.e., she limits the Maya. 

Yoni the causes of the Universe, viz., Brahma, etc., 
Nilaya in whom all these rest. 

Or Yoni, the three-angled chakra, Nilaya, she dwells 
therein in the form of Bindn. The Saunaka S'akha of 
Atharva Yeda says, “ In that golden bud which is three¬ 
angled and contains the three (things) which is to be wor¬ 
shipped, those who know the Self know that as Brahman.” 
“ The preceding verse says, “ It consists of eight chakras, 
of nine doors, the city of Devas unconquerable. In 
that (.city) there is a golden bud, the heavenly world 
enveloped in light,” The Com. Unconquerable (Ayodhya) 
which connot be entered even by gods, i.e., difficult of 
attainment. The city, the S'rlchakra. S'ankararanya, the 
author of a Kosa called Vis’va says, “ Pflr (city) means 
wheel (chakra), own, house, room, cave.” The meaning 
is, the earthly Ayodhya, the place where the Devas can 
live, is unattainable by men, but this Ayodhya (S'rlchakra) 
as. unattainable even by gods. ‘ Consisting of eight 
chakras ’ : the eight chakras are Ashtara (eight-angled) two 
d’as'aras (ten-angled), Manu-as'ra (fourteen-angled). Asbtedala 
Jotus (eight-petalled), Shorias'adala lotus (sixteen-petalled), 
the Bhflmitraya and Bhtlgrahatraya. ‘ The nine doors,’ 
the nine triangles. The NityShridaya says, “By the anion 
of the five S'aktis and of the four fires (of Siva) the chakra is 



LAtlTA SAHASRANAMA 323 

produced.” The triangles whose apexes point downwards 
(SvAbhimukhSgra) belongs to S'akti, those whose apexes 
point upwards tParanmukhSgra) belong to fire. This is 
the conventional terra of the Mantra S'astra. ‘ In that city 
there is a golden bud’: ‘bud’ in the triangle form. 
‘ Heaven, etc.’ : it is called heaven because it is blissful. 
In that triangle, there is a chakra in the form of Bindu, 
in it there is a holy thing (Brahman) which the Brahmavits 
perceive by their Self only. The meaning is they perceive 
Brahman separated neither from the Self nor from the 
Bindu. 

890. KOtastha. 

Kntha lit. deception, i.e., veiling one’s own nature 
which is bliss, etc., it makes one fall into Samsara ; hence 
kata means ignorance. Stha, she governs this. The 
S'ruti fBh. Gita, 12-3) says, ‘‘Governing ignorance 
(Kntastha) immovable, firm.” Or kata, ignorance, stha, 
seat, i.e ., the foundation of ignorance is in her. Or kata 
mountain peak, stha, she remains motionless like & 
mountain peak. Or kata, the iron anvil which remains 
on the ground while iron instruments are fashioned on it ; 
stha, she remains unchanged like this. Or kata, the 
multitude of Universes, stha, these reside in Her. 

Or kata, Vagbhava,. etc. (the three divisions of 
Panehadasl Mantra) stha, she remains in them. Or kata 
the gate of the city, i.e., the three-angled chakra which is 
within the S'rlchakra, stfui she remains in it. The Vis'va 
says, “Kflta means a machine, deception, zodiac, anvil, 
illusion, mountain peak, and summit, insignificance, part 
of a plough, vanity, gate of the city.” 

897. Kulardpini. 

Kula means the path of the Kaulas, external worship, 
race or conduct. (liH!) 

898. Fond of the assembly of warriors. (Vlragosh- 
7hipriyil.) 

899. Valorous. (Vlra.) 



324 


LAL1TA SAHASRASTAMA 


The Namamala says, “ She who has a husband and 
sons is called Vlra.” 

1100. Abstaining from actions. (Naishkarmyft.) 

The S'ruti (Kaivalya 22) says, “ I am neither sinful 
nor righteous.” Smriti (Bh. Gita 5—10) also, “ He is free 
from the taint of action.” The Yoga Sfttra (1-24), “ Is'vara 
is a person untainted by pain, action, the result of action 
and mental impression.” 

Thus ends the BodhinI Kala with the ninth hundred 
in the Saubhagyabhaskara composed by Bhasurananda. 


TENTH HUNDRED 

901. In the form of Nada. (NadarQpinl.) 

Nada is above the Pranava. The great ones say, 
“ Thy blissful form, 0 Queen, is manifested as Nada in the 
place called Anahata, experienced by the mind turned 
inwards ; the blessed ones express it by tears in their eyes 
and by hairs standing erect.” 

Or whose form is in Nada. The Svachchanda Tr. says, 
‘‘That which I described to you by the name of Rodhini, 
above that resides Nada . . . one should meditate on the 
supreme S'iva going upward sitting on the lap of that.” 
(See name 296.) 

902. Causing perception. (Vijnanakalana.) 1 
Vijn&na (perception) : the direct perception of 

Brahman, Kalana, making the perception one’s own. 

• ■ According to the Karma Pr., “ VijnSna means retain¬ 
ing in the mind the fourteen Vidyas with their meanings.” 

903. Skilful. (Kalya.) 

Kalya, able to create. The Vis’va says, “ Kalya (neu.) 
creation, dawn, (masc.) one without disease, a skilful man, 
(feminine) auspicious speech, liquor.” 

1 Bh. Nara. Vijnana means Jivas, Kalana, blossoms. 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


325 


904. Artful. (Vidagdha.) 

905. Seated on Baindava. (Baindavasana.) 

The Baindava resembles the round spot above the 
brows. The Svachchanda Tr. says, “Above the Hakini 
circle there is a disc called Bindu . . . there, after 
describing the lotus, and S'iva, there is the energy 
Manonmani, which is above the Santi, on (his) left 
side, etc.” 

Baindava means Sarvanandamaya chakra (the 9th one). 
» Or Baindava, the collection of Bindus, lIsama , her 
support, i.e., that which indicates the meaning of them 
(Bindus). The Jnanarnava Tr. says, “ 0 fair one, I will 
explain to you the collection of Bindus which are in the 
form of BIja, know, 0 Parvati, Ha with Bindu as Brahma, 
Sa with Bindu and Sarga as Hari and myself, 0 Queen of 
Devas, the relation between Hari and Hara is that of 
inseparable association . . .” After describing Varna, 

etc., Ichcha, etc., waking state, etc., all those are in the form 
of Bindus, thus it is concluded by explaining, “ Thus as 
(Devi) is joined to the three Bindus (or each Varna, etc.,) 
she is named Tripura.” 

Or prefixing the A to the name : Ap, in the water, 
aindava, the multitude of moons, i.e., of Jlvas, asana, she 
remains, (the meaning is) she remains alone by non-differ¬ 
ence (in the multitude of Jlvas) which are her different 
reflections (like the various reflections of one moon in 
different waters). 

The S'ruti ,(Br. Bindu. Up., 12) says, “ (Brahman) is 
seen as one and as many like the moon in the water.” (167) 

906. Transcending the categories (Tatvas). (Tatva- 
dhika.) 

Tatvas, the thirty-six, those which remain until the 
Pralaya, hence the pot, etc., are not included. The wise 
men say, “ What remains till Pralaya, giving enjoyment 
to all beings, that is called Tatva, hence the body, pot, 
etc., are not Tatvas.” 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


907. Reality itself. (Tatvamayl.) 

Or Tatvadhika (906), means S'iva ; Tatvamayl, S'iva 
himself. The meaning is, she is both Samprajnata and 
As'amprajnata Samadhis. This is explained in the Jnanar- 
nava ; “ The Samprajnata Samadhi arises by transcending 
S'iva. The As'amprajnata one arises with the S'iva Tatva.” 
The nature of each is given in the same work. “The 
Samprajnata is twofold quick, and very quick. The 
As'amprajnata one is slow and very slow. The quick and 
very quick Samadhis are indicated, 0 Devi, by laughing,® 
crying, by hair standing on erect, trembling, and per¬ 
spiration, etc. The slow and very slow Samadhis are 
indicated by the fixity of the eyes and of the body.” These 
two, one attains by concentration of the mind in a certain 
light (Tejas). That light must be perceived through a 
teacher alone. 

Or Tatvamayl, the three Tatvas, viz, Atma Tatva, 
Vidya Tatva and S'iva Tatva. She is collectively in the 
form of these three Tatvas as well as transcending the 
three. 

The wise say there are four Tatvas. “ Atmatatva 
corresponds to Maya, Vidya to Sadas'iva, S'ivatatva to S'iva 
and S'akti. The fourth (the Turlyatatva) the collection of 
these three together.” Or there are three Tatvas Sat, Chit 
and Ananda. From S'iva to earth there are thirty-six tatvas 
born from Brahman who is Sat, Chit and Ananda. Of 
these S'iva and S'akti correspond to Ananda (lit. they are 
merged in Ananda). Sadas'iva, Is'vara and S'uddhavidya 
correspond to Chit; and all the Tatvas from Maya to earth 
Correspond to Sat. Of these three the S'ivatatva includes 
the other two, the second Vidyatatva includes the second 
and third with a trace of the first. The third Atmatatva is 
the third with the traces of the other two. Of course 
S'ivatatva corresponds to Ananda because it is a blissful 
one, Vidya to Chit, and Atman to Sat, taking the meaning 
of mere existence. Thus is the secret of the three Tatvas. 



LALITA SAHA8RANAMA 


327 


Or Tatvamayl means the thirty-six Tatvas as the limbs 
of Brahman whose body is composed of the six aspects. 
The KAmika says, “ Those who know the Agamas Say the 
thirty-six Tatvas, vis., earth, etc., are semen, marrow, bone 
of the body of him (Brahman) in his aspect of Tatva.” 

908. The meaning of the words ‘ That and Thou. ’ 
(Tat vamarthas vartlpin I.) 

Tat, S'iva, tvam, the Jlvas as used in the MahAvakyas. 
That is She is both S'iva and the Jlvas. 

, 909. Fond of Sama songs. (Samaganapriya.) 

Or S&maya, the singers of Samaveda, ana, life, priya, 
fond. She is fond of them as of her own life. 

91,0. Benign. (Saumya.) 

Saumya she is fit to be adored in the Soma sacrifice. 

Or Sa, accompanied, Umd with Devi, i.e., S'iva; 
Saumy/X, S’iva is but a part of her. 

Or Soma, moon also camphor, Saumya , pleasing like 
the moon or like camphor. 

911. Wife of Sadas'iva. (SadAs'ivakutumbinl.) 

This may mean the deities Syamala, S'uddhavidyA, 
As'varfWha, etc. (168) 

912. Standing in the right ahd left paths. (Savyapa- 
savyamargastha.) 

Savya, right, apasavya, left, marga (the middle) paths, 
stha, standing. The meaning is she stands in the three 
paths, she gives (the result) of the three paths, she makes 
one the ruler, etc., of the three. Or the three paths reside 
in her. There are three paths of the solar disc distinguish¬ 
ed. as Uttara (north), Dakshina (south) and Madhyama 
(middle). Three Nakshatras (constellations) beginning 
with As'vinI make one Vlthi (line), three Vlthis make a 
Marga (path). These are fully described in the VAyaviya 
Pr. ; “ As'vinI Krittika, and Yamya (Bharanl) form Naga- 
vlthi. RohinI, Ardra and Mrigas'iras, form the Gajavlthi. 
Pushya, As'leshA and Adit ya (Punarvasu) form the AirAva- 
tivlthi. These three Ylthis form Uttara path. The two 



328 


LALITA SAHASRAKAMA 


Plialgunis and Makha form RishatSvIthi. Hasta, Chitra 
and Svatis named Govlthi. Jyeshfha, Vistakha, Anuradha, 
is Jaratgavivithi. These three Vlthis form the Madhyama 
path. Mttla, Pftrva and Uttara Ashadha is Ajavlthi. 
S'ravana and Dhanisbtha and S'atabhishak is called Mriga- 
vithi. The two Bhadrapadas and Revatl is Vais'vanaravlthi. 
These three form the Dakshina path.” Here Savya 
(meaning both south and north) means the north path 
consisting of the three Yithis, Naga, Gaja and Airavathl. 
Apasavya means the south path consisting of the three 
vithis, Aja Mriga and Vais'vanara. Marga means the 
middle path with the three Vlthis Rishata, Go' and 
Jaratgata. Or Marga, means the Uttara path, deriving the 
meaning from that which belong to Mriga, for the north 
path has relation with the Mrigas'iras Nakshatra. Savya, 
means the middle path because it is the left side of the 
south. Apasavya of course means the south path. This 
is one explanation. 

Or Savya, the way of gods called the path of light 
only to be attained by renunciation ; apasavya, the way 
of the Pitris called the path of smoke, etc., attained 
by worldly men. The word M&rgastha means the 
world of Vishnu the residing place of Dhruva. Dhruva is 
the polestar on which depends the established paths (marga) 
of the sun and the planets ; hence nidrgastha, means 
Dhruva. The full description of this occurs in the Vishnu 
Pr. (II, 8, page 263. Wilson’s) : “ On the north of Agastya 
and south of the line of the Aja, exterior to the Vais- 
vanara path lies the road of the Pitris. There dwell the 
great Rishis, the Agnihotris, the Mahatmas, reverencing 
the Vedas after whose injunctions creation commenced, 
and who were discharging the duties of ministrant priests. 
For, as the worlds are destroyed and renewed, they 
institute, and re-establish the interrupted rituals of the 
Vedas. Mutually descending from each other, progenitor 
Springing from descendant and descendant from progenitor, 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


329 


in the alternating succession of births, they repeatedly 
appear in different houses and races,—along with their 
prosperity, devout practices and instituted observances,— 
residing south of the solar orb, as long as the moon and 
stars endure.” The Agastya’s place is on the north path 
of the LokiUoka mountain. The Matsya Pr. says, ‘‘ The 
fourteen Lokapfilas (the protectors of the world) are residing 
in the Lokaloka mountain. The north peak of that is the 
place of Agastya worshipped by gods and Rishis.” The 
path of the gods lies to the north of the solar sphere, 
(■which is) north to the Nfigavithi, and south of the seven 
Rishis. There dwell the S'iddhas, of subdued senses, 
continent and pure, undesirous of progeny, and therefore 
victorious over death. Eighty-eight thousand of these 
chaste beings tenant the regions of the sky, north of the 
sun, until the destruction of the Universe : they enjoy 
immortality, for they are holy, exempt from covetousness 
and. concnpiscense, love and hatred, taking no part in the 
procreation of living beings ; and detecting the unreality 
of the properties of elementary matter. By immortality 
is meant existence to the end of the Ealpa. Life as long 
as the three regions (earth, sky and heaven) last means 
exemption from reiterated death.” 

The space between the seven Rishis and Dliruva the 
third region of the sky, is the splendid celestial path of 
Vishnu ; and the abode of those sanctified ascetics who are 
cleansed from every soil, and in whom virtue and vice are 
annihilated. This is that excellent place of Vishnu to 
which those repair in whom all sources of pain are extinct, 
in consequence of the cessation of (the consequence of) 
piety or inequity, and where they never sorrow more . . . 
The seat of Vishnu is contemplated by the wisdom of the 
Yogins, identified with supreme light, as the radiant eye of 
heaven.” This is another explanation. 

There are two paths in the worship, the right hand 
path and the left hand path. The left hand path means he 
42* 




330 


LALITA HAHASRANAMA 


should always meditate upon his own deity (Devi) in all 
ceremonies described in the Vedas snch as Agnihotra, etc., 
or in the ceremonies enjoined in the Smritis such as 
Ishtaka, etc., or in the mantra, siddhis, etc., described in 
the Tantras, whatever chief deities or secondary deities are 
invoked he should add his own deity; that is (in every 
ceremony) one should add or repeat his particular or chosen 
deity after repeating the deities which belong' to each 
mantra. He who goes by this path will have with him 
the sin as he does not discharge bis (three) debts tcf Devas, 
Kishis and Pitris. But in the right hand path, in the place 
of the deities of the ceremonies as enjoined in the S'ruti 
and other works, his chosen deity U.e., the deity whom he 
worships) should be necessarily substituted and worshipped. 
As he observes all the rites described in different scriptures, 
as described above (i.e., he worships his chosen deity) in 
the place of other deities of different ceremonies, he has 
no sin with him of that (left hand path) as he t has 
discharged the debts of Devas, etc., by the meditation on 
one supreme god. Hence he attains Moksha soon. But in 
the V5ma path (he attains Moksha) slowly ; because in this 
there is an obstruction for a certain period of time in his 
way as he has not discharged the debts of gods, etc. 
(Question). Then no intelligent man should follow Vama 
path because the result is not to be attained soon, but he 
will gladly cling to the Dakshiha path though the path is 
difficult, because the fruit is soon obtained. (Answer) It is 
not so, many S'ishtas (good men) will follow the Vama path. 
For they should wait a little time to finish all their karmas 
•whether high or low by the enjoyment in the same body. 
This is explained at length in the Kalika Pr. : “ Every¬ 
where whether in the Devi mantras or in the Vedic mantras, 
and in all the mantras to gods he should duly meditate on 
Bhairavl, Tripura. One should add the suffix Bhairavi, to 
all the names of the deities (as a subject). (The Devi name) 
should not be recited w ithout (the names of other deities) 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


331 


as qualified. For instance, in performing the Achamana 
ceremony (rinsing the mouth) after repeating the word 
‘ Apahpunantu Prithivlm ’ he should add the word ‘ Tripura 
Bhairavi So also with the mantra ‘ Drupada It should 
be repeated in the mantra thus ‘ Idam Vishnuh Bhairava, 
vichakrame ’. This mantra is used in the ceremony of 
receiving ‘ mrid In the repetition of the G-fiyatrl 
mantra the word Tripura Bhairava is to be affixed. In 
the ‘ Arghya ’ ceremony one Should repeat ‘ Martanda 
Bftairata ’. In the mantra ‘ Udityam,’ ‘ Shryam ’ Bhairava 
is to be suffixed. In the ‘ Tarpana,’ one should say ‘ let 
Brahma Bhiravi be satisfied.’ In the consecration of the 
Pitris ••the word Bhairava is to be added throughout the 
Tarpana mantra. So also the word Tripura is to be 
affixed. In the Jyotishfoma, AsVa medha and other sacri¬ 
fices also the Bhairava and Bhairavi are to be worshipped. 
Thus by the VSma method Tripura Bhairavi should be 
worshipped, and also by the Dakshina path. When one 
worships Rishis, Devas, Pitris, men, and all other beings, 
by the Pancha yajna ceremony for the Sake of discharging 
the debts (owed to the above) according to rule, with 
piety and gifts and other essential ceremonies, it is called 
Dakshina path. The worshipper also is called Dakshina 
because he identifies himself with that method. When in 
the above ceremonies of Devas, etc., the worshipper offers 
everything in the name of Devi (Tripura Bhairavi), this 
method is called Varna; the worshipper also is called 
Varna as he is entirely devoted to this path. In the Varna 
path one may or may not perform the panchayajnas, 
because anything offered goes to the deity of Vama path. 
He, who clings to the Vama path, has no debt to gods, etc. 
to discharge, as he indentifies himself in every ceremony 
with the Tripura, the wise man attains Moksha. The 
follower of this Vama path attains Moksha after enjoying 
for a long time in this world, wealth, Shining with a 
beautiful body like that of Manmatha, subduing kings 




332 


LALITA SAHANRANAMA 


on all sides with their respective dominions, charming all 
women who are confused with cupidity, controlling lion, 
tiger, bear and Bhfitas, Pretas and Pisfachas, wandering 
at his own will unobstructed like the wind, worshipping 
Bala or ThripuradevI, Madhya, Bhairavi with supreme 
devotion, or worshipping Kamesvar! or Kama occasionally, 
by the Dakshina or Varna path. So one should worship 
Devi whether by Varna or Dakshina path. But one 
should worship the deity Mahamaya, Saradft, and also 
the daughter of Himavan (Parvatl) by the Dakshina path 
alone. If any one who worships the Mahamaya, etc., 
except by the Dakshina path, that sinful man fallen from 
all (virtuous) worlds becomes possessor of diseases. But 
the Devatas S'ivadtitI, etc., which are described above are 
to be worshipped either by Dakshina or by Varna path- 
The follower of Varna path does not observe many 
ceremonies ( i.e ., he restrains from worshipping many 
gods) but he of Dakshina path fulfils all, hence the 
Dakshina path is better.” Thus S'iva says to Bhetala and 
Bhairava. According to this explanation the meaning of 
the name is She is worshipped by both Savya and 
Apasavya paths. The drift is in reality the Tripurasundarl 
is not separate from the deities, viz., Tripura Bhairavi 
and others who are worshipped only by the Varna path, 
the Devatas S'arada, etc., who are worshipped only by 
the Dakshina path, and the deities Such as S'ivadtitI, etc., 
who are worshipped by both the above paths or by one of 
either. Thus another explanation. 

Or according to the S'iva S'fitra (III, 45). Svaya 
means Ida Nadi, apasavya, Pingala, m&rga, of course, 
Susbumna, S/ha, she is to be reached (by restraining 
the breath). 

913. Bemover of all misfortune. (Sarvapadvini- 
varinl.) 

This name proceeds to show that Devi removes all 
misfortune, by compassion, by means of (repeating her) 



LALITA SAHASRAHAMA 


names, easily, of those who are fallen from the above 
two paths and sunk into a miserable state, as described 
in the S'ruti (Chcha. 6-2-16) : “Those, who do not 
recognise these two paths they (consequently) become 
worms, birds, etc.” In the Karma Pr. Devi says, “ Those 
who, forsaking attachment, take refuge in me, and ever 
worship me with devotion, by the method of divine 
Yoga, having compassion on all beings, tranquil, self- 
controlled, free from envy, humble, wise, ascetic, of vows 
performed, with minds fixed on me, whose lives are in 
me, delighting in narrating my wisdom, whether, San- 
nyasins, or Grahasthas, or Vanaprasthas, or Brahmacharins, 
and e*ren those who are devoid of these characteristics, 
if they repeat my name, ever devoted to me, I quickly 
destroy in the same birth even mountains of misfortune 
by the lamp of wisdom.” In the Harivams'a Vishnu 
says to Devi : “ The bondage of men consists of death, 
difficulty, the death of sons, loss of wealth ... in all these 
misfortunes, thou alone dost protect; there is no doubt.” 
In the Varaha Pr. also after the praise of Devi by Brahma, 
etc.: “O Devi, for those who attain thy supreme refuge, 
no misfortunes or dangers arise.” The wise also say 
“What should be done in misfortune? One should 
remember the feet of the mother. What does that 
remembrance do ? It makes even Brahma, etc., his 
servants.” 

31st verse divides 37 names. 

914. Independent. (Svastha.) 

As she is devoid of the agitation created by pain, etc., 
she is independent. 

Sva and St ha abiding in herself. The S'ruti (Chcha. 
Up., 7-24-1), “ Where does that lord abide ? He abides in his 
own Majesty. Thus replied.” 

Sva, heaven (Svarga) Stha, abiding therein as the ruler. 

Su, well, astha, fixed without return. 

915. Whose nature is sweet. (Svabhavamadhura.) 



334 


J.ALITA SAHA9RANAMA 


Without contact with the Upadhis (bodies, vehicles) 
she is to be desired by all. The Vis'va says, “ Madhura 
(neu.) what is sweet and things liked by all. In fern, a 
flower called S'atapushpA Mathtill and a mountain.” 

Or, Sva, her, Bhava, residence, Madhura, at the place 
Madhura. This means the goddess MlnakshI in the 
Hslilsyakshetra. 

Or, Sva, her, Bha, light, Avama, the-best, the best of 
the wise, Dhura , yoke, she bears the yoke or burden of the 
wise. As the yoke of the chariot is the most important 
part, she is the leader of the wise. One should not think 
the word avama means inferior, for we see the words 
Avama and TJtiama, used to mean best and last respectively. 
Refer the S'ruti Agni, etc., “ Agni is the best of 
gods. . 

Or, Svabha, the knowledge of the Self, vama t<Pcreate, 
i.e., those who inculcate the knowledge of the Self, Dhura, 
she is the leader (of them). 

Or, Su, well, abhava, absence of desire, hatred, 
partiality, mercilessness, etc., Madhura. It is understood 
by the expression well (Su) those who possess the above 
qualities, viz., desire, hatred, etc., are not good ones. 

Or, Sva, in her devotees, Bhava by remaining, 
Madhura sweet. 

Or, Sva, their own (devotees) Bhava, by devotion, 
Madhu, best fruit (knowledge) ra, gives. The word Madhu 
is explained to mean best fruit, in the S'ruti, ‘ Following it 
he attains Madhu.’ Thus other meanings of Bhava, e.g., 
opinion, incarnation, etc., may be added here. 

. .916. Wise. (Dhlra.) 

Or possessed of strength. 

Or, DM, the knowledge of non-duality, ra, gives. The 
Smriti (Avadhfttaglta, 1st Slo.) says, “ By the grace of the 
Lord alone men obtain the tendency to non-duality.” 

Or, DM, knowledge, ira, the deity of the tenth day 
which gives knowledge. 



LAL-ITA SAHASRANAMA 


335 


917. Adored by the wise. (Dhlrasamarchita.) 

The S"ruti says, “The wise-and poets praise him.” 
Hence the wisdom of Kulyanacharana is shown by the 
following: “Throw me, 0 mother, into hell or raise me 
into the rulership of all the worlds, surely I will never 
forsake thy feet, certainly not.” 

Or, Dhi, the wisdom called Dhi, rasa, bliss, archita, 
worshipped, for the sake of obtaining the bliss, one 
worships Devi. (169) 

918. Worshipped with consciousness as the oblation. 
(Chaitanyarghyasam&r3dhy5.) 

Chaitanya (the Chit Rtlpa) : The S'iva Satra (1-1) says, 
Chaitanya is the Self.” Arghya, water, etc., used in the 
worship. The meaning is the Niradhara (supportless) 
worship is the nature of meditating on the non-duality of 
consciousness. The Bhavana Up. (10): “Wisdom is 
Arghya.” The So. Sam. (1-5-19) : “ One should worship 
with devotion, the Mahes'varl, who becomes oneself by 
one’s own spiritual experience. That worship alone confers 
salvation.” 

Or, Chaitanya, the self, arghya, wisdom, that in his 
own spiritual experience. The Yis’va says, “Arghya (masc.) 
means water, etc., used in worship, knowledge, root of a 
tree ” ; or arghya a vidyCt, a mantra belonging to female 
deity called Chaitanya, that is, the Bhuvanes'vari mantra 
SamdradhyO, worshipped (by means of the above mantra). 
It is said, “ The mantras belonging to female deities are 
called Vidyas, those belonging to male deities are called 
mantras.” The Sa. Sam. (4-42-52), “By repeating the 
Chaitanya mantra ten thousand times, he is released from 
the multitude of great sins as well as from other sins.” 
Here the commentator explains that the Chaitanya mantra 
is the Bhuvanes'vari mantra. 

Or, Chaitanya, the essence of the wisdom. The Vis'va 
says, “ Chetana means wisdom . . .” The Rudrayamala 
Says: “ Of wisdom and mead wisdom is the better.” 



336 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


919. Fond of Chaitanya flower. Chaitanyakusuma- 
priya.) 

Chaitanya, according to the Tantrikas, means the fifth 
essence (Rasa) called ‘ kunda golodbhava Because it is 
created from the human beings. (See the Tripura-Up.) 

Or, Chaitanya , consciousness, (that itself is called) 
Kusuma, flower, because it produces the highest result; 
Chaitanya is (also) compared to a flower by poets, for we 
see (in the Sau. La., SI. 3) : “ Devi is the flow of honey iD 
the flower of Chaitanya.” This flower stands for seven 
other flowers, for it is said by great men : “ Non-injury is 
the first flower, second restraint of the senses, third pity, 
fourth compassion, fifth wisdom, sixth penance, seventh 
truth, and the eighth is meditation. 

920. Ever sublime. (Sadodita.) 

Or, Sat, among good men a, for ever, udita, a$j)ears. 

921. Ever contented. (SadatuskfS.) 

Or ever, contented with good men (sat). 

922. Rosy like the morning Sun. (Taruwfiditya- 

pStelii.) 

She assumes different colours according to the form 
under which she is contemplated. Hence there is no con¬ 
tradiction (of different colours under which Devi appears) 
as S'yama, Gaurl, etc. The Sruti (Br. Up., 2-3-6) says, 
“Just like silver, white cloth or white woollen cloth or 
like the colour of Indra gopa stone.” The Smriti also 
says, “ When she confers salvation she becomes peaceful 
(in appearance) and white in colour. In her aspects as 
controlling women, as controlling kings, controlling men 
she. becomes red in colour. In her aspect of controlling 
wealth she becomes the colour of saffron. In the action of 
slaying she becomes black. When creating enmity she 
becomes tawny. In the S'ringara she becomes rosy 
coloured. Devi, the supreme light is to be meditated upon 
as differently coloured according at her different activities.” 

(170) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


337 


923. Adored by right and left (hand worshippers). 
(Dakshinadakshinflradhya.) 

Lakshina, by offerings, Lakshina, by wise men, 
Hradhya, worshipped. 

Or, Lakshina, wise men, adakshina, foolish men f or 
Lakshina, those who are ever desirous of knowing Karmas 
(religious actions). For the word Lakshina is explained 
thus in the S'ruti, “ By knowledge ascetics ascend .to where 
desires cease, which do not reach the Lakshinas, (the 
Karmins) nor foolish men.” 

Ada.kshinas, those who know Brahman. The Bh. 
Gita (7-16) : “ Four kinds of good men are wor¬ 

shipping me, O Arjuna, distressed, one desirous of 
knowing (me), seeker after wealth, and wise, 0 best 
of Bharatas.” 

924. Whose lotus face is wreathed with sweet smiles. 
(Darasmeramukhambuja.) 

Or, Lara, the conch shell, Smera, shining, i.e., shin¬ 
ing white, her face shines like a white conch shell or her 
neck resembles in formation a conch shell. Or, Lara, in 
time of fear Smera, her face is always shining, even in 
time of fear. The meaning is even at the time of final 
dissolution when the faces of others become pale with fear, 
the face of Mother alone remains smiling. 

Lara, protecting (the devotees). Her face is always 
gracious to her devotees. 

925. Pure and worshipped by the devotees of the 
Kula. (Kaulini kevala.) 1 

Kevala, the knowledge of Is'vara, because we often see 
it thus used in the Jaina Trs. 

Or, Kevala, devoid of all attributes, or freed from 
pleasure and pain. In the S'iva S'tltra (III, 35) Siva is 
named as “ Kevalin who is freed from those two ”. 
The Vis'va says, “Kevala means (neu.) a certain kind 

‘There is some discussion on the division of names in the com 
mentary which is dropped here. 

43* 



338 


LA LIT A SAHASRAJJAMA 


of knowledge (masc.) one, complete, (nen.) decision, 
(mas.) deception.” The first three meanings are also 
to be taken here. 

Or she is decided (Kevala) by the Kauias. e 

According to another reading ‘ Kalini kevala,’ she is 
the pure time. 

926. Giving the abode of priceless salvation. (Anar- 
ghyakaivalyapadadayini.) 

Anarghya (priceless), unlimited, Kaivalyapada, is the 
fifth state of salvation. Some add A before anarghya (a) 
then means everywhere. (171) 

927. Fond of praise. (Stotra priya.) 

Stotra , there are six kinds of worldly praises The 
great men say, “ Salutation ( Namask&ra ), Asls (blessing), 
praising the attainments (Siddhantokti), praising exploits 
(Parakrama), rehearsing glory (Vibhfiti), prayer for 
prosperity (Prarthana). These are the six characteristics 
of praises.” For example refer to the names—(627) 
worshipped by three worlds, (928) recipient of praise, (735) 
supporter, etc., (658) Ichchasakti, etc., (692) bestower 
of, etc., are respectively to be taken for Namaskara. 
etc. 

Or, it refers to the Vedic praise, namely, rehearsing the 
attributes of the gods about whom mantras are sung. Or, 
stotrap, the waters which are to be praised, these (waters) 
mean here Devas, Pitris, men and Asuras. The S'ruti says, 
‘‘These are the four waters.” In the SFuti (Cheha. Up., 
5-3-3), “ In the fifth oblation, the water becomes men,’’ it 
is said the water becomes formed of men, etc. In another 
S'ruti (Maha. Nara. Up., 14-1) also it is said, “All this indeed 
water.” 

928. Recipient of praise. (Stutimatl.) 

Or, Stuti, by praising her, Mati, knowledge and «, 
dominion (are to be obtained). 

929. Whose glory is celebrated in the scriptures. 
(S'ruti samstutavaibhava.) 



LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


339 


According to Kos'a (Amara 501), Samstuta means 
experience, i.e., her greatness is experienced by the 
Scriptures. Or S'ruti, four, i.e., her glory is experienced 
in four ways, the Person in the body, the Person in the 
metres, the Person in the scriptures, and the great Person 
as described in the Bahvricha. Up. She is in the four 
forms (Vytthas). The Kttrma Pr. also : “ Devi has four 
S'aktis ; they are declared to be her own nature, and she is 
the support of these four ; Listen to me 0 best of Munis, 
these are S'anti (peace), Vidyii (knowledge), Pratishtha 
(fixity), and Nivritti (restraint). Hence the Supreme Lord 
is said to be four-formed. By these four S'aktis (he 
supreme Lord enjoys his own bliss.” 

930. Intelligence. (Manasvinl.) 

The mind depends upon her. 

931. High-minded. (Manavati.) 

MO.na may mean the elevation of mind, regard, the 
expression indicating the forgiveness of sin, proof, or 
measurement. 

932. Mahes’I. 

The wife of Mahes'a (S'iva). The Devi Pr. says, “ As 
she was born from Mahadeva and worshipped by great 
men (Mahat), and as she is the wife of Mahes'a she is called 
Mahesl.” 

933. Of beneficial appearance. (Manga lakritih.) (172) 

934. Mother of the Universe. (Visvamata.) 

Or, Vifva, Vishnu. The S'ruti (says) : “ . . . Ae 

mother of Vishnu.” 

935. Supporter of the world. (Jagaddhatri.) 

Or, DMUri, nurse, because she protects. The S'ruti 
(Br. Up., 4-4-22) : “He is the protector of the world, he is 
the firm bridge for the sake of preserving order of the 
beings.” The Devi Pr. also, “ Wherefore you sustain the 
world and assign functions to them. The root Dha means 
to bear, sustain, hence she is called by the wise the 
sustainer of the Universe.” 



340 


LAI-ITA SAHASBANAMA 


936. Large-eyed. (Vis'alakshl.) 

According to Padma Pr. she is the deity worshipped at 
Benares. Though the word Visdla, means Badarikas'rama, 
here means NephalapUha as both the places*, are in the 
Himalayan regions. Brahma, and other Prs. say, in the 
Piithanyasa that the Nephala PUha should be meditated 
upon as situated in the eyes. Hence is VitsMa, Nephalpltha, 
akshi, eyes, i.e. , eyes of Devi are the Nephala Pjfha (in 
her universal form). 

937. Dispassionate. (Viragini.) . „ 

938. Strong. (Pragalbha.) 

She is strong in the action of creation, etc. 

939. Supremely generous. (Paramodara.) * 

According to the Amara (470) Uddr&, means great : 

she is great in space and time. The S'ruti: “ He is like 
ether, all-pervading, eternal.’’ Or, Para, supreme, Moda, 
bliss, a, on all sides, ra gives. Or, Parama, much, it da, 
water, i.e., ocean here meaning the ocean of worldly 
existence ; dra, weapons, she is the destroyer of the worldly 
existence (of her devotees). 

By prefixing a to the name we get aparama, etc. : apa, 
gone, rama, joy, i.e., miserable, to such persons she is, 
udard, generous. 

940. Supremely delightful. (Paramoda.) 

Amoda, sweet smell, i.e., fame, or a on all sides, moda, 
hsyjpiness. 

941. The Mind. (Manomayi.) 

Because the pure Brahman is (to be) fixed in the mind. 
The Va. Rama, says, “ That Bhairava, Siva, is said to be 
Chidakas'a, his own active energy (Spandas’akti) is known 
as manomayi. 1 

Or, Manomayi : mind is the chief instrument. The 
S'ruti (Br. Up., 4-4-19) ; “By mind alone it is to be seen.” 
According to this, Manas is the chief instrument in creating 
self-knowledge. (173) 


Spanda Sakti is the S'akti which manifests from Earth 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


341 


942. Whose hair is the ether. (Vyomakesl.) 

In her Virat, (universal) form the ether becomes her 
hair ; or she is the wife of Vyomakes'a, S'iva. Or, Vyo- 
maka, small, hi, ruler, she is the ruler of even 
atoms. 

Or, Vyomaka-lsi, S'iva in his ether form, his wife is 
called Yyomakesl, in her form of quarters. 

943. Eesiding in the celestial chariot. (Vimanastha.) 

Vimdnantha are the Devas who remain in the celestial 

chariot, she is not different from them. 

Or, Vi, much, Man a, protection (of her devotees), 
stha, engaged : such is her position. Or, Vi, much Ma, 
light. Ana, chariot, Stha, residing. She remains in radiant 
chariots such as Kirichakra and others. Or, Vi, without, 
Ma, limitation, i.e., unconditioned Brahman, Stha, residing 
in that ; or she limits the Brahman, or she is without 
limitation. Or, Vi, much, Ma, measures, i.e., establishes 
decision, i.e., Vimana, scriptures, stha, remains, i.e., she 
is . described in the Vedas. Vimana, proof which are not 
opposed to the Vedas, stha she remains therein in the 
nature of Dharma. Or, Vimana, the fourteen Vidyas, viz., 
Parana Nyftya, Mimamsa, etc. The holy Jaimini in his 
Suira (1-3-5 and 6) says, “ If an inferential statement . . . 
No, because a system has its own limits, etc.” 

944. V^jrini. 

The wife of Indra, the possessor of the Vajra, the 
thunderbolt ; or bearing Vajra in hand, or adorned with 
jewels called Vajra. In the S'ruti (Kafha. Up., 6-2), “ The 
great terrible Vajraja . . .” Vajra means Brahman. 
Devi is called Vajrini as she is related with Brahman as 
Its limitator. 

945. Vamakes'varl. 

Vamakes'vara is the name of a Tantra. Vama are 
those who follow the Vama (the doctrine inculcated in the 
above Tr. or Vama path) ; Vamaka, contemptible because 
they do not perform the five sacrifices (Pancbayajnas). 



342 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Or, V&maka, Daksba and other progenitors-of the race 
(vam to create). 

946. Fond of the five sacrifices. (Panchayajniapriya.) 

According to the S'ruti the five sacrifices are ‘ Agni- 

hotra, Darkapfirawamasa. Chatjurmasya, Pasn and Soma.’ 
According to the Smritis they are Deva, Pitri, Brahma, 
Bhttta and Manushyayajnas. The Pancharatragama gives 
the five branches of worship, viz., Abhigamana (approach¬ 
ing the guru), Upadana (receiving instructions), Ijya 
(sacrifice), Svadhyaya (repetition of mantras, etc.) and 
Yoga (meditation). The Kaula agama enumerates the five 
kinds of worship, Kevala, Yamala, Misra, Chakrayuk, and 
Virasangraha. The Nitya Tr. gives out five kinds of 
worship which accomplish all kinds of desires, namely, 
Madya, etc. The Brahmatantra kaumudl and its text 
Mantra-mahodadhi mean the five kinds of (women) Aturi. 
S'autakI, Daurbodhi, Traslsadhana, and Bhavini. 

Or the five kinds of sacrifices of water, which according 
to the S'ruti (Chcha. Up., 5-3-3) form the body of a man in 
the last oblation. The five places of sacrifices are Soma- 
loka, Dyu, earth, man, and woman. 

Or, Pancha, extended, yajna, the abode of the creators 
of the world. 

947. Reclining on a couch formed of five corpses. 

(Panchapretamanchadhis'ayinl.) _ 

Brahma and the other three (gods) are the four legs 
of the couch and Sadas'iva is the mattress. The Bhai- 
ravayamala says in the Bahurupkshfaka Prastara : “On 
that great and pleasant couch whose pillow is Mahesana, 
of-whose four legs are Brahma, etc., and whose mattress 
is Sadas'iva, reclines the great Tripurasundari, the great 
Queen.” Acharya also (Sau. La. SI. 91) : “ Brahma, 
Hari, Rudra and Is'vara became the four legs of 
your couch and the Sadas'iva became the pure white 
sheet.” (174) 

948. The fifth. (Panchami.) 



LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


343 


In the order of Brahma, etc., Sad&s'iva is the fifth, 
his wife is Panchaml. The Sft. Sam. says even Sadas'iva 
the fifth, requires the help of the Mother : “ Rndra is the 
hest of the three (Brahma, etc.) the supreme Siva, the 
possessor of Maya. Sadas'iva who is with the Mother 
and is possessed of permanence, etc., is better than the 
omniscient S^iva, the possessor of Maya. Of this there 
is no need of discussion.” Or the word Panchaml means 
YarahJ by conventional (Rflrfhi) acceptation. Though 
we see the term used as a derivative one (yoga) in places 
such as ‘she is the fifth in the order of Brahmi, etc., 
she is the last in the deities of Pancharatna ’ like the 
deities, of the five sheaths (Panchakos'a), yet we find the 
word ‘ Panchaml ’ generally used as a conventional one 
in the Dakshinamtlrti Sam. and other places, namely, 
‘ one should worship the son of the fifth ’ ‘ . one should 

meditate in his heart the Panchaml ’ ‘ Panchaml . . 
yantra are very difficult to obtain in the three worlds ’ ; 
or we can take the word (Panchaml) to mean Var&ri as a 
conventional or derivative one. 

Or she is the fifth (Pancha) M (mi) which is bliss. 
The Kalpa Sfttra (Para. 1-12) says : “ Bliss is the form 
of Brahman, that is established in the body. There are 
five M.’s which indicate that ; the worship (of Devi) by 
these (five) is secret.” 

Or she® the five M.’s taken collectively. These points 
are set forth in the Tripura-stlkta (Tripura. Up.) and their 
meaning, namely, gift, purification, etc., must be learned 
from the guru. 

Or, Panchaml , the fifth sacrifice in the form of ob¬ 
lation of semen in the woman, as described in the S'ruti 
(Che hit. Up., 5-3-3) : ‘ In the fifth oblation the water forms 
person.’ Or, Panchaml, the fifth state of salvation. 

949. Ruler of live elements. (Panchabhntesl.) 

Or, Panchabhrda, fivefold, because that is the garland 
called Vaijayantl formed of five elements and five gems. 



344 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


The Vishnu Pr., “ The club-bearer’s (Vishnu’s) garland 
called Vaijayanti is five-formed as it consists of five 
elements, it is also called the element-garland, 0 twice 
born one.” Here ‘five-formed,’ means the five kinds 
of jewels, pearl, Manikya, Marakata, sapphire, and 
diamond. The Vishnu Rahasya also says, “ From earth 
comes the blue black gem, from water pearl, from fire 
the Kaustubha, from air Vaidtlrya, from ether Pushparaga. 
Thus the five form the Vaijayanti garland of Hari.” 

950. Worshipped with five objects. (Panchasan- 
khyopacharinl.) 

These are scent, flowers, incense, lamp, offering 
of food. „ 

The 32nd verse divides 50 names. 

Meditate in your pure heart on the succession of 
Gurus from S'iva to one’s own Guru, who are the suns of 
all good qualities, lords of the Devas, the destroyers of the 
four (kinds of births), the givers of four kinds of bliss, 
(w£., Drirfha, Amoda, Ghana, and S'ukha) the expounders 
(of the Vedas) who have new feet. 1 

951. Eternal. (S'as'vatl.) 

S'asvat, frequently, i.e., she is worshipped con¬ 
tinuously by her devotees. The Sruti (Ka£ha. Up., 5-12) : 
“ To them alone belong eternal attainment, not to others.” 

952. Possessing eternal dominion. (S'akyatais'varya.) 

Some prefix the syllable 1, the 1ms, theh-ulers of the 

Universe (Brahma, etc.), the five corpses, Asrvatd, the 
condition of being a horse (vehicle), Aifvarya, dominion, 
i.e., the five corpses (Brahma, etc.) form her seat. 

953. Giver of happiness. (S'armada.) 

954. Bewildering Sambhu. (S'ambhumohinl.) (175) 

955. Earth. (Dhara.) 

Or supporter of the Universe. DharCL, the letter La 
which represents her form. The Jnanarnava says, “ The 

> This supplies as usual the rules for the names and also indi¬ 
cates benediction at the close of the names. 



LAT-ITA SAHASRANAMA 


345 


letter La is the goddess of the earth, with mountains, 
forests and deserts, and having the fifty sacred places, and 
all the places of pilgrimage, etc.” 

956. Daughter of Himavat. (DharasutA.) 

957. Fortune. (DhapyA.) 

Or possessing wealth. Or Dhanya, is a certain Yogin! 
as mentioned in the Jyotisha S'Astra, vis., ‘ MangalA, PingalA 
DhanyA ’ ; or Dhanya : there are four kinds of thoughts 
which arise in the last stage (CharamakiUina) which are 
Artha, Raudra, Dhanya and S'ukla. The Bh. Utta. Pr. says, 
“ Those who know say that Artha, is that meditation which 
arises through illusion the desire to possess dominion, 
pleasure beds, seats, women, scents, garlands, jewels, cloths 
and ornaments.” “ Raudra is said by the wise to be that 
meditation, in which arises desire and not indifference, 
though he had (experience from) wounds, fire, beating, 
cruelty, bodily injury, breaking limbs, etc.” ‘‘ Dhanya is 
said by the wise to be that meditation in which arises a 
thought by the following of the meaning of the IJpanishads 
(Sfitra)$ and by the performance of great vows, etc., about 
the causes of bondage and liberation and going and coming 
(re-incarnation), and of the tranquillity of the five senses, 
and compassion in all beings.” “ Sukla is said by the wise 
to be that meditation in which by practice of yoga which 
destroys the constructive imagination the senses are not 
tainted by^naterial objects, the inner Self is fixed on its 
unity with one reality (Brahman).” The result of the 
above four is thus set forth in the same Pr. “ The man 
who practises artha becomes Tiryak, an animal or a 
mineral; he of Raudra descends lower ; the one of Dhanya 
goes to the Devas, and attains good results : and one of Snkla 
is freed from (future) births. Therefore in meditation the 
wise man should cultivate the Sukla state which removes 
the pain of re-birth, beneficial, enables one to cross the 
ocean of existence and which calms passion.’’ 

958. Righteous. (Dharmini.) 

44* 



346 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Dharminl, the possessor of suck attributes as experi¬ 
ence of bliss, eternity, etc. 

959. Increaser of righteousness. (Dharmavardhini.) 

The Vamana Pr. says, “ Control of the senses, purity, 

and wifehood with devotion refer respectively to S'ankara, 
Sun, and to Devi . . . S'iva and his spouse, meditated 

upon by men, increase in them these (three) qualities.” 

Or she is the destroyer (vardhini, from root vridh to 
cut), of the objective world (lit. Dharma the conditions). 

960. Transcending the worlds. (Lokatlta.) 

Lokas, from Indra to Vishnu loka, transcending these, 
she resides in the city of Paras'iva called Mahakailasa. The 
■S'iva Dharmottara says that the city of Paras'iva transcends 
■all worlds. Again after describing the lower worlds, it 
says : “ Above the abode of Vishnu, one should know the 
great divine, city of S'iva ”... This great city of 
Siva is called Apada, men devoted to works return* again 
from this world. After describing the city of Siva which 
is to be attained by those devoted to works, again proceeds 
* Above the city of S'iva there are three supreme seats, 
eternal, ever-pure, resorted by Skanda, Uma and S'iva . . .’ 
Those Who attain this supreme seat, devoted to meditation, 
do not return again to the terrible ocean of Samsara. They 
become omniscient, omnipresent, pure, merged in Mahes'- 
vara, possessed of the strength of S'iva and. attain the 
Supreme city of S'iva.” Or Lokas, the Vivas, Atltd 
transcending. 

961. Transcending attributes. (Gunatita.) 

962. Transcending all. (Sarvatita.) 

■ •Sarva , all words. The Jnanaruava says, “ Know 
Parabrahman, which transcends speech and is beyond 
counting, as ourself.” 

963. Tranquillity. (S'amatmika.) 

Sama, tranquillising the activity of the world. The 
Mand. (7) Nr. Tapini. Ups. (2) says, “ They hold that 
(it is) tranquillity of the (activity) of the world, peace, 




LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


347 


non-dual, the fourth.” Or S'am, bliss, Atma, her 
nature. (176) 

964. Resembling the Bandhflka flower. (Bandhttka- 
kusumaprakhya.) 

Bandhiika is a tree in the Vanga country, and its 
flower is very red. 

965. Girl. (Bala.) 

The S'ruti (S've. Up., 4-3): “Thou art boy or girl.” 
The Tripura Siddhanta also says, “ 0 beloved one, as thou 
dost play like a child thou art called Bala (child).” 

966. Taking pleasure in amusement. (Lilavinodini.) 

Llld, the play (of the activity) of the Universe. 

Lila is the name of the wife of Padma Raja, a king 
-mentioned in the YogavasisMha. Vinodinl, she leads that 
queen into right action. The story is given thus : Lila 
Devi worshipped Sarasvati and pleased her and received 
knowledge from Sarasvati and brought back her husband 
to life. If the word Lila is taken as a separate name, it 
means LakshmI. The Devi Pr. explains it thus : “ Lakshmi 
is called* Lila because she fondles (Lalana).” 

967. Very auspicious. (Sumangall.) 

Su, beautiful, Mangala, Brahman. The Vishnu Pr. 
says, “That, by remembering which, drives away misfortune 
from men and gives much benefit, that supreme Brahman 
they knowg^s Mangala.” The Atri Smr. says, “ The 
performance of right action and avoiding wrong action is 
called Mangala by Rishis who speak of Brahman.” 

968. Giving happiness. (Sukhakarl.) 

969. Decked with beautiful raiment. (Suveshadhya.) 

970. Ever married. (Suvasini.) 

Suvasini, a woman whose husband is living {i.e., 
exempt from widowhood, or Devi is not separate from 
sdch women. (177) 

971. Pleased by the adoration of married women. 
(Suvasinyarchanaprlta.) 

972. Ever beautiful. (As’obhana.) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


348 


973. Pure-minded. (S'uddhamanas’a.) 

974. Pleased by offerings in the Bindu. (Bindutar- 
panasamtushta.) 

Bindu is the Sarvanandamayachakra; Tarpana is 
offerings in that Chakra by Brahmanas with milk, by 
Kshatriyas with ghee, by Yais'yas with honey and by 
Sfidras with mead. Bindu means also the wise men and 
she is pleased by their offerings. 

975. First-born. (P&rvaja.) 

The S'rutis say, “ It is She whom (sages) recognise as 
the first.” (Tai. Up., 3-10-6), “ I am the first born of 
Truth.” Also Purvaja means the first creation which was 
without intelligence. 

976. Tripurambika. 

Tripura is the name of the deity of the eighth Chakra 
(Yoginihridaya 2-11) ; or Tri, three, Pura, states 
(Avasthas), ambikd, mother. Or Tri ; Para jlva because 
he has three states. The S'rutis (Kai. Up., 14) : “ The soul 
who plays in the three cities.” (Kau. Up., 3-3), “ Like the 
sparks from fire.” Or Tripura, the cities, 'such as 
Varna, etc. * (178) 

977. Worshipped by ten Mudras. (Das'amudra 
samaradhya.) 

(Madras positions of fingers practised in worship. 
See Pllrvachatussati, chap. III.) p, 

The ten Mudras are from Samkshobhini to Trikhanda 
and they are the means by which she is regularly 
worshipped according to the manner laid down in the 
Nityahridaya. 

• • 978. The ruler of Tripura. (Tripuras'rlvas’ankarl.) 

Tripuras'ri is the name of the deity which presides 
over the fifth Chakra. 

979. Jndnamudrd. 0 

This is formed by joining the tips of the thumb and 
fore-finger (to make a circle and extending the other 
fingers), or Jnitna, by knowledge, Mud, bliss, Pd, 



tALlTA £ AH ASK AN AM A 


349 


she gives. Or, JnCLna, chit. Mud, bliss, Dra, she 
veils. 

980. To be attained by knowledge. (Jnanagamya.) 

The Kflrma Pr. says, “ My unconditioned nature is to 

be attained by wisdom alone and is bare absolute conscious¬ 
ness, benevolent, freed from all limitations, infinite, 
immortal, supreme, that supreme abode is to be attained 
through much difficulty. Those (wise men) thinking, 
knowledge is the best means, enter me.” 

981. Knowledge and knowing. (JnSna Jneyasva- 

rttpinl.) (179) 

982. Yonimudra. 

This is the ninth Mudra ; or she gives happiness in 
the womb ; or Yonl is the veil which covers Bindu ; or 
Yonl, the place between anus and the generative organ. 
The use of the Mudra in removing mistakes in the mantra 
must be learned from the Guru. 

983. Ruler of Trikhanda. (Trikhanrfes'I.J 

Trikhmida is the tenth Mudra. Or, trikhanda, means 

the three divisions of the panchadasl mantra. 

-984. Endowed with the three qualities. (Triguwa.) 

This means the primordial matter (Prakriti) of the 
Sankhyas as it is the basis of the three qualities, Satva, 
Rajas and Tamas. The Vayu Pr. says, “ This Yoges'vari 
creates as well as destroys forms ; she has many forms, 
many functions, and many names; by function and by her 
sport she is threefold in the world, hence she is called 
Triguna.” The Vishnu Pr. also, “ I reverence that eternal 
energy, which is thy energy which is all beings and in all 
souls, the basis of the qualities.” The Devi Pr. explains in 
another way ; “ As she has three steps, the three paths (of 
Ganga) the three qualities, etc.” ; for it says, “ Bali was 
bound by three steps, the Ganga came from three places, 
Svarga, etc., by three qualities Satva, Rajas and Tamas, she 
performs the functions of creation, preservation and des¬ 
truction, hence she is called Triguwa.” 



350 


LALITA SAHASRANA8L& 


985. Mother. (AmbaJ 

The previous name was ‘ endowered with the three 
qualities,’ hence she is the cause of the three qualities. 
This is called in the Tantras the soul of the Mantras 
(Mantrajiva). The Tantraraja says, “ The three qualities 
are the cause of Tejas, of the forms of S'akti, and of the 
Universe. The cause of these (qualities) is that (Devi) 
Samyaktva (rightly) means the attainment of perpetual 
contemplation of the nature of That. That Samyaktva is 
called the strength of the mantra or the soul of the 
mantras.” Or, She is the Amba, the mother of all the 
worlds. 

986. Residing in the triangle. (Trikonaga.) 

Trikona is Yonichakra. 

987. Sinless. (Anagha.) 

Agha, means sin, pain, misery. 

988. Whose deeds are wonderful. (Adbhutacharilra.) 

Adbhuta, earthquake, etc., ch&ri the bad" results 

thereof ; tra she protects (she protects her devotees during 
such occurrences). 

989. Bestowing the desired objects. (Vanchitartha- 

pradayini.) (180) 

990. Known through constant devotion. (Abhya- 
satis'ayajnata.) 

As it is said, “ Till sleep as well as till deatlrone should 
employ himself in reflection on the Vedanta,” she is known 
by constant meditation upon the unity of Brahman and the 
Self. The Ved. Stl (4-1-1) “Repetition, (of the mental 
functions of knowing, meditating, etc., is required) 
on account of the text giving instruction more than 

The Brahma. Pr. also : “ She, whose limbs are know¬ 
ledge, whose body is science, and whose abode is heart, is 
to be seen by constant meditation. By constant practice 
in meditation she becomes manifested through the union 
with the Self.” 



351 


LALITA SAHASEANAMA 

991. Transcending the six methods. (Shadadhvatlta- 
rflpini.) 

The six methods are, words (Padadhva), worlds (Bhu- 
vana), letters (Varna), categories (Tatva), parts (Kala) and 
Mantra (Mantradhva) ; of these, three are the parts of 
Vimars'a and the other three of Prakas'a. The Virflpiksha 
Panchas'ika says, “ The quality of Vimars'a is attributed to 
three, viz ., words, mantras and letters, of Prakas'a, is 
worlds, categories, and parts." About these the Jnanar- 
nava says, “ In this Chakra there are six methods, O Devi, 
adored by warriors, . . . thus one should meditate by six 
methods upon the pure S'richakra.” Thus ends character¬ 
istics ^scribed to each method, i.e. , methods of meditating 
upon S'iva, viz., as manifested in words, etc. The 
Dakshina. Sam. also : “ Hear now, 0 ruler of Yogas, the 
nature of six methods . . . thus one should meditate by six 
methods upon the S'richakra. ” 

Or, six methods, the six kinds of devotion, these are 
the means of attaining Devi. The Kularnava says, “To 
him, whose mind is purified by the mantras of S'iva, 
Vishwu, Durga, the Sun, Ganapati and Indra (or Indu), 
appears the knowledge of Kula (Devi).” The meaning is 
that those who in previous births were followers of any of 
the six kinds of devotion, attain in this birth the devotion 
to Devi. ■ 

992. Cbmpassionate without partiality. (AvyAja- 
karunamftrtih.) 

The great ones say, “ Glory to Devi the compassionate 
one.” 

993. The lamp (that dispels) the darkness of. ignor¬ 
ance. (Ajnanadhvantadipika.) 

The Bh. Gita (10-11) : “ Out of compassion to them I, 
residing in their heart, dispel the darkness of ignorance by 
the lamp of knowledge.” (181) 

994. Known even to children and cowherds. (Abala- 
gopavidita.) 




LALITA SAHASBAXAMA 


Bain, Brahma, etc., qupa, the protector, i.e., Sad&sriva ; 
or Balat/opa, Krishna ; the meaning is she is known to 
every one from Sadasdva, Vishnu down to children. The 
Sft. Sam. (1. X. 36 says) : “ Ail beings recognise Him in 
the shape of the idea of, ‘ I 

995. Whose commands are never disobeyed (Sarva- 
n u 1 langhy as'asana.) 

But it may be asked, since ‘ familiarity breeds con¬ 
tempt,’ when it is known to each person (that he himself 
is Devi), will not her command be ignored ? This name is 
the reply to the question. Sarva (all) Brahma, Vishnu, 
etc. Achary^ Sau. La. (Slo. 24), “ Brahma creates the 
Universe, Vishnu protects it, and Rudra destroys it, Isa 
annihilates all these three as well as himself. And, finally, 
under thy orders indicated by the movement of thy 
creeper-like brows, Sadas'iva approves of the same.” 

996. Abiding in the Royal S'rlchakra. (S'rlchakra- 
rsjanilayS.) 

S'rifJwJrra, consisting of Bindu, triangle, etc. It is 
said, “S'rlchakra is the body of Siva and Devi.” The 
meaning is just as the Jlva resides in the body so they 
reside in the S'rlchakra. 

997. The divine Tripurasundarl. (S'rlmattripura- 
sundarl.) 

The wife of Tripurasundara, Paras'iva. 

Tripura, Paramas'iva, because the three, Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra are his body. The Kalika Pr. says, 
“By the will of the Pradhana the body of Siva became 
triple. Then the upper part of Mahes'vara became Brahma 
with five faces, four arms, and whose body had the colour 
of the pericarp of the lotus. His middle part became 
Vishnu of blue colour, having one face, four arms, bearing 
the conch, disc, club and lotus. The lower part became 
Rudra having five faces, four arms and the colour of a 
white cloud and the moon as a crest jewel. As these three 
Pnras are in him, he is called Tripura.” (182) 



LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


353 


998. The divine Siva. (S’ri S'ivd.) 

999. The union of Siva and Sakti. (Sivasuktyaikya- 
rttpinl.) 

Her nature is the equal essence of S'iva and S'akti, 
The VSyavlya Sam. says, “ By the will of S'iva, the 
Supreme S'akti becomes one with the S'iva Tatva. Again 
she manifests at the beginning of creation like oil from the 
oil grain.” Here ‘Union’ means the supreme equality, 
the being absolutely without difference. The Saura. 
Sam. says, “ The Sakti which is separate, from Brahman 
is not different from Brahman itself. Such being the 
case it is only called Sakti (as separate) by^the ignorant. 
It js impossible to distinguish the difference, 0 wise one, 
between the Sakti and the possessor of S'akti.” The 
Va. Rama, also : “As there is only one movement of air, 
only one Odhyana PUha (in the world), and only one 
manifested Chit S'akti, also there is only one Union (of 
Siva and Sakti). ” 

Or, S'iva, the Siva chakras, S'akti, the S'akti chakras, 
Aikya, Union. The Brahma. Pi-, says, “ In the triangle 
Bindu must be united, the eight-angled one is to be 
united with the eight-petalled lotus ... He who 
knows the necessary relation between the parts belonging 
to Siva and the parts belonging to S'akti in the S'rlchakra 
is the real knower of the chakra.” 

Or this name means the Hamsa mantra, for in this 
mantra is declared the Union of Siva and Sakti. The 
SO. Sam. (4-7-2) : “ Sakti of Him, (Siva) is said to be 
the end of the syllable S’d (/.<?., Sa) and end of that (i.e., 
Ha) is called Blja. The Blja is the Vidyftshkti. That 
itself is Siva. Therefore this supreme, mantra is said 
to signify Siva as well as S'akti.” 

Or, S'iva S'akti, the live S’aktis of S'iva, ?•/’., TMi tun ri¬ 
val!, etc., and Aikya, their collective form which is 
Devi, The Virllpaksha Panchakika says, “ DliQmfivatl 
veils, Bhasvat! reveals, the Spanda stimulates, the 
45* 



354 


LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


Vibhvi pervades, the Hladas'akti nourishes. The- 
Dhflmavatl Sakti belongs to earth, Hlada to water, 
Bhasvatl to tire, Spanda to air, and Vibhvi to ether, thus 
the world is pervaded by these.” 

1000. The Mother Lalita. (Lalitambika.) 

Thus by the first three names the goddess is indi¬ 
cated as the creator, preserver, and destroyer of the Uni¬ 
verse, by the next two names, she is indicated as possessing 
two other functions, viz., annihilation and re-manifestation 
which belong to no other deity, from the sixth name 
to the last the same deity who possesses these five 
functions was described in different ways and is indicated 
by the name Lalita which is her special name and belongs 
to no other deity. 

Lalitambika : Lalita as well as Mother. The mean¬ 
ing is given in the Padma Pr. : “ Transcending all worlds 
she sports (Lalate) hence she is called Lalita.” ‘ Worlds ’ 
means her surrounding lights or deities. ‘ Transcending ’ 
being above their abodes in the Bindu-place. ‘ Sports ’ 
shines brilliantly. The wise say, “ The word Lalita has 
eight meanings, vis., brilliancy, manifestation, sweet¬ 
ness, depth, fixity, energy, grace, and generosity, these 
are the eight human qualities.” The Kama S'astra says : 
Lalita means erotic actions and also tenderness, as she 
has all the above-mentioned qualities, she is called 
Lalita. It is said also, “ Thou art rightly called Lalita 
for thou hast nine divine attendants (in the SYichakra), 
and your bow is made of sugar-cane, your arrows are 
flow'ers, and everything connected with you is lovely 
(Lalita).” The word Lalita according to S'abdarnava, 
means beautiful. 

This deity according to the Padma Pr. is the deity 
worshipped at Prayaga. 

At the end of this name Om should be pronounced. 
This has been explained at the beginning of the first 
name. It should also be remembered that the rule has 




LALITA SAHASKANAMA 


355 


been explained according to the different castes. Though 
the two Pranavas (at the beginning and the end) are not 
parts of the names, they Should be repeated for the sake 
of the benediction. Because it is said, “ The words Om 
and Atha arose at the beginning at the first opening of the 
mouth of Brahman, hence both words are auspicious.” 
Moreover if any Mantra is repeated without the addition 
of Om at the beginning it becomes ineffective, and without 
the addition of Om at the end it becomes dispersed. 
■According to this saying if the Om is not. repeated harm 
ensues, but if the Om is repeated the result is far-reaching 
(adrishta). , 

N<jw t.the author of the Paribhasha verses) shows 
the first word of the names of the each hundred. 

33. £>rl, Mani, Sad, Hrlm, Vividha, Gnda, Dara, Des*a, 
Pushta, and Nada, are the beginning letters of the each 
hundred. There is no meaningless word (like Oha and 
other particles), nor the repetition of names in the 
Sahasranama). . 

34. One should add a and a with the names (where 
there are names like repetition) of Mati, Varada, Kanta 
Raktavarna, etc., respectively. 

35 and 36. The learned should split the name SadhvI 
into two as Sadhu and 1 and Tatvamayl as Tat, tvam, and 
ayl. . . 

37. There are four names in masculine, such as Guna- 
nidhi, Atman, Rogaparvata, Mahalavanya; two names 
^re in neuter as Tat and Brahman, and two names are in 
Avyaya (indeclinable) as Svaha and Svadha. 

Thus ends in the Saubhagyabaskara composed by 
Bhaskarar3ya the eleventh Kala called Dharini with the 
tenth hundred. 



CHAPTER III' 


38. (Paribhasha verse.) In the Pbala chapter one to 
twenty and half verses say the recitation is meant to 
confer (on the r eciter) different kinds of results ; the next 
46 verses are elaborating the same. 

1. Thus, 0 pot-born one, the thousand “names 
declared to you, the secret of secrets which pleases Lalita. 

Thus : The number of the thousand names is here 
exact and not mere or less like the Sahasranimas of 
Sarasvati, Gangs, etc., where the counting is only 
approximate. 

Secret, etc. : The Devi Sahasran&mas, which are des¬ 
cribed in the Kflrma and other PurSnas, though they are 
exactly thousand in number, yet are not most secret. 

2. There has been no Stotra equal (in merit) to this, 
nor is there ever to be one (such). This (stotra) causes all 
diseases to subside and confers all prosperity. 

Prosperity : Elephant, horse, etc. 

3. It averts untimely death, avoids timely death, 
removes the pain caused by fever, and confers longevity. 

Untimely death : From the tiger, serpent, etc. 

4. It blesses the issueless with sons and confers (all) 
tDe PurushSrthas. This Stotra especially is highly pleasing 
to S’rl Devi. 

All the Purusharthas: The Padma Pr. Pushkara 
Khanda says in the Ahnika Prakarana, “ The wise should 


’ I have included in this edition all the useful matters of the 
commentary which were left out in the 1st edition. 



LAIilTA SAHASRANAMA 


357 


worship the Gods. If one worships Ganes'a, the impedi¬ 
ments (Vighna) will never trouble him. One should 
worship Stirya for health. Vishnu for Dharma and Moksha ; 
Siva for Dharma, Artha and Moksha ; and the Chandika 
for all the four (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha).” 

5 and 6. The devotee of Lalita should always with 
effort repeat this. After the morning bath he should 
perform the Sandhya ceremony regularly, go into the Pnjfi 
room and there worship Srlchakra. Then he should repeat 
the (Panchadasl or Shodasl) Vidya a thousand times, or 
three hundred, or one hundred times (the least). 

Regularly : According to Vaidika and Tantrika rites. 

■7. Then again he should repeat this Secret Saliasra- 
nama. The wise one who repeats it at least once in his 
life time (attains the following results). 

8. Listen thou, 0 Pot-born one ! I will declare to 
thee the results of such a virtue (of repeating these names). 
Bathing in the Ganges and all other holy waters number¬ 
less times. 

Bathing in the Ganges : Pushkara is the head of all 
the places of Pilgrimage (Tlrthas) which has its source 
from this earth. Ganges has come down from the Heaven 
(Svarga). Hence Ganges is the best of all the Tlrthas. The 
Bh. Uttara Pr. explains the name of Ganga thus : “As 
thou wen brought by Bhaglratha from Svarga to earth, 0 
Devi, thou art called Ganga (,Gam=earth and Ga reached) 
by all the Sages.” 

. 9 and 10. Instituting crores of Lingas in the Avi- 

mukta (Kshetra) ; giving away (in charity) crores of 
candies of gold to learned Dvijas during the solar eclipse ; 
performing innumerable horse sacrifices on the banks of 
the Ganges. 

Ammukta : The Linga Pr. says, “ Am means sin, O 
best of twice-born one, and Mukta means freed, I do not 
(a) separate (him) from that place ( vimukta ) ; hence it is 
called Avimukta.” 



358 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


According to Brihat Jabala and other books there are 
four Kshetras (holy centres) in K&sl, viz. : 1. Kasi, 2. 
Varanasi, 3. Avimukta, and 4. Antargriha, each succeeding 
one of which is holier than the preceding. Thus Antagriha 
is known as the holiest of all. It is said to be the body of 
Paramas'iva himself and to be permanent in nature. 

Giving away, etc. : Mahabharata and other works say, 
“ One may be freed with difficulty from the sin of receiv¬ 
ing anything at any time from any one (by undergoing 
expiation ceremony). But one does never become freed 
from the sin if he receives gifts at Kurnkshetra at the 
Eclipse time. 

Candies of gold : The Brihaspati says, ‘ ‘ There are the 
three highest gifts, which are of cows, land, and Sarasvatl 
(Vidya) ; but all the three come out of gold.” 

Learned Dvijas: Possessed with birth, sacraments 
and knowledge. 

Horse sacrifice : (TheS'ruti) says, “ One overcomes the 
sin of Brahmanicide and all (other) sins, who performs the 
horse sacrifice.” 

11. Digging a number of wells in arid tracts ; feeding 
BrShmanas by crores in times of dearth and famine daily. 

12. All these being done with supreme faith regularly 
for a thousand years, the resulting Punya multiplied times 
without number (by itself) equals, 

13 and 14. The supreme Punya which results from a 
repetition of a single name of the secret Sahasranama. The 
accumulated sins of him who repeats at least a single name. 
of this secret Sahasranama are all destroyed. There is no 
dopb.t in this. 

15. All sins of omission of prescribed daily duties 
and commission of prohibited actions, are surely destroyed. 
Why describe in so many words ? Listen, O Pot-born one : 

16. No person in all the fourteen worlds is capable 
of committing a sin which cannot be removed by a single 
name in this Sahasranama which is the antidote of all sins. 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 359 

17. He who desires to cleanse himself of all sins by 
any other means than this Sahasranama is like one who, to 
get rid of cold, goes to the Himalaya Mountains. 

By any other means : Like one who was running from 
fear of scorpion and taking protection in the mouth of an 
angry king cobra. 

18. If the devotee repeats this Sahasranama daily, 
Lalita is pleased and confers on him the desired objects. 

The devotee : Who has the following four qualifications; 
namely : 1. he must be devoted, 2. he must recite the. 
stotras (Sahasranama, etc.) in full (3 chapters), 3. he should 
continue this till the end of his life, and 4. daily followed 
by early bath, japa, etc. 

The desired objects : The Sastras, which are treating on 
Prayaschitta (expiation) are useful to those who are not the 
devotees of Lalita. The devotees of Lalita should not resort 
for their sins committed, to those Prayaschitta S'astras, 
when they have this Sahasranama. 

19. How can one who does not repeat this hymn be 
called a devotee ? If he is unable to repeat it daily, let him 
do so on auspicious days at least. 

Be called a devotee ? : According to the Bha.-Glta (7-13), 
“ Fourfold in division are the righteous ones who worship 
me, O Arjuna ; the suffering, the seeker for knowledge, 
the self-interested, the wise, O Lord of the Bharatas ” ; 
there are four kinds of Devotees, amongst them, the 
1st should repeat this Sahasranama for removing his 
.sins, the-2nd for the purification of his mind (chitta- 
s'udhi) ; the 3rd to acquire wealth, and the fourth for the 
welfare of the world. This is well-explained in the 
Bhaktimimamsa Bhashya, “ in the highest sinners . . .” 
(Sfltra). 

On auspicious days : KapilashashthI, Ardhodaya, etc., 
(i.e., on the conjunction of certain days with planets). 

20. On Sankranti day, during the summer and winter 
solstices, on the three birth-days, in the Ayanas, on NavamI 



360 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


(9th) or the 14th ilay of the bright fortnight, and on 
Fridays. 

On the three birth-days : The three birth-days are those 
of oneself, wife and son ; or three Nakshatras (constella¬ 
tions) preceding and succeeding one’s own; or every 
ninth Nakshatra (anu Janma) of his ; or one’s own birth¬ 
day, Diksha day, and Purnabhieheka-day. The selection 
of the days is to be made according to the wish of the Guru, 
as there is a saying, “ As there are different (selections) 
in the Tantras, one should get the opinion of the Gurus.” 

21. This Sahasranama should be repeated especially 
on the Paurnamasya (the full-moon) day, meditating on 
mother Lalita as seated in the disc of the moon. 

In the disc of the moon : In the disc of the full moon 
the Sadakhya Kala, the eternal one, is in the form of 
Tripura Sundari. The other 15 Kalas (parts) of the moon 
are waxing and waning, which are the deities of Kames'vari 
to Chitra, from the 1st to 15th day respectively. These 15 
Kalas are joined with the 16th and with the Anima and 
other (7 deities). Hence the disc of the moon is the Srl- 
chakra itself (of Devi) and not her image. Therefore there 
is no Avahana (invoking the deity to be present in the 
image) ceremony, etc. 

22. And worshipping her with five kinds of Upacharas 
one should repeat this Sahasranama. Such a person gets 
all his diseases destroyed and obtains a long lease of life. 

Worshipping, etc.-. Says the Sruti, “He is that I.” 
“That He is I.” “That indeed art thou.” “ Thou art 
indeed that,” etc. Therefore on should identify himself 
with the deity meditated upon. This is the chief worship. 

With five kinds : 1. offering of Sandal, 2. of flower, 3. 
of scent, 4. of light, and 5. of food. The Padma Pr. 
describes the result of the worship thus : “ The thousands 
of horse sacrifices and the hundreds of Vajapeya sacrifices 
are not equal to one lac of a part of the worship of^LalitEl. 
He is the giver (of gifts), he is the sage ; he is the saerificer. 



LALITA SAHASEANAMA 


361 


he is the performer of penance, he is the pilgrim, who 
worships the Devi always with sandal paste, flower, etc.” 
-Again, “ Having smeared the Devi with sandal. One gets 
the results of Jyotishtoma sacrifice.” Further, “ Having 
applied Lalitfl with sandal paste, agaru, and KarpOra with 
fine powders, and with kumkuma, one will reside in 
Heaven for crores of years.” Or as the rule lays down 
“inner and outer worship the householder always should 
perform, etc.”. One should perform two kinds of worship. 

Inner jworkhip: Indeed is the identification (of Devi 
with himself) ; the outer worship ; is with offering of 
sandal, flowers, etc., only with mental ideas. 

2<V This process is called the Ayuslikara (tending to 
increase the length of life) Prayoga and is mentioned in 
the Kalpas. 

Kalpas : Kalpas are the works written by Paras'urama 
and other Rishis. The Tantras are also indicated by the 
term Kalpas. The process referred to as Ayushkara Pra¬ 
yoga is as follows : 

On an auspicious full-moon day when the duration of 
the full-moon lasts from sun-rise to whole of that day, get 
up early morning, observe the caste rules in regard to 
daily rites enjoined in the Yedas and Tantras, fast the 
whole day ; in the evening take a good and clean bath, 
perform Sandhya and other daily Yaidic and TSntric rites, 
and go through the usual course of religious reading 
(PSrSyana). When the full orb of the moon is visible on 
;the horizon, choose a pure locality, furnish yourself with a 
seat repeating the prescribed Mantra, face the east, and in 
the sitting posture rinse your face and mouth and do 
PranaySma with the Panchadas'I Mantra. Then go on with 
Sankalpa (determination) in the following words : “With 
a view to get rid of diseases and gaining longevity, I, with 
the name . . . belonging to . . . Gotra, am going to perform 
the Ay^shkara-Prayoga by reading the Lalita-Sahasranama- 
malamantra.” After this, gaze at the disc of the moon 



3f>2 


LAIjITA sahasranama 


steadily, and meditate on Tripurasundarl at its centre, as 
surrounded with the whole group of fifteen Nitya deities 
and your own Guru ; realise all of them as your own Self, 
offer them sandal, etc., with the prescribed Mantras and 
thus complete the five Upacharas. With your eyes fixed 
on the Chandramandala recite the first fifty verses of this 
Sahasranama; then the Dhyanasioka with Nyasa, etc. 
Follow this up with Omkara according to the rules of 
caste and order, and repeat the thousand names distinctly 
and slowly, noting the meaning and sense conveyed by 
each name, from S'rimata to Lalitambika. When this 
is over, pronounce the Omkara, perform Nyasa and 
close with the recital of the Phalas'ruti (the chapter on 
results). 

During the Japa let your mind and eyes .be steadily 
fixed on the Devi identified in the disc of the moon. 
Withdrawing yourself therefrom attend to your physical 
surroundings : rise from the seat, offer presents to the 
followers of the Samaya sect, and receiving their blessings 
in these words : “ Let this ceremony which you so devo¬ 
tedly performed be an accomplished fact. May Tripura- 
sundari be pleased with your devotion,” go and take 
your meals. 

They who perform the daily worship of Devi (nitya) 
are entitled to do the worship called Naimityaka (obli¬ 
gatory! ; they who perform the above two are fit to 
celebrate the Kamya (optional) worship, thus the Tantra- 
raja says. 

Or Kalpas .- (another meaning is)-even in Kalpa, i.e., 
Mahapralaya, in the great deluge, the performer of this 
Prayoga will have his own influence. 

23—24. By touching with the palm the head of a 
feverish person, reciting this Sahasranama, fever and 
headache are got rid of immediately. 

Feverish person : the following is the Prayoga ; on 
the day when the patient has the symptom of fever, the 



LALITA SAHASBANAMA 363 

practitioner having performed his daily avocations, an A 
sitting on a pare place should make the Sankalpa saying 
* such a patient should get rid of fever, etc.,’ this prayoga 
is called the ‘ fever-remover ’ ; next he should allow the 
patient to sit on his right side faced north, and besmearing 
him with holy ashes with (Panchadasl) mantra ; he should 
repeat the 1st part (of this Sahasranama) ; then place his 
right palm on the patient’s head and recite the 
Sahasranama. Next he should remove his palm and recite 
the Phala .chapter and feed the Brahmans, etc. If the 
practitioner has to do for his fever, he should place his 
palm on his own head himself. The repetition should be 
continued till the fever subsides, as the Vedanta Sutras 
(IV-1-1) say “ Repetition (should be continued) as the 
instruction is repeatedly given.” The repetition is for t&e 
Sahasranama only, and not for the introductory and the 
concluding parts (1st and 3rd chapter). This should be 
observed in all succeeding Prayogas. 

24— 25. By the external application of ashes mes¬ 
merised with this Sahasranama for healing purposes, all 
diseases are immediately cured. 

25— 26. 0 Muni ! Mesmerise a potful of water with 

this Sahasranama and pour it on the head of a person who 
is possessed,” and the Graha (elemental) will at once leave 
that person. 

Graha : Balagraha, Pis'acha, bad Elementals, and nine 
planets. 

, 26—27. By meditating on mother Lalita as seated in 
the midst of the nectar-ocean, and repeating this Sahasra- 
nam% poison (if taken in) can be digested (and assimi¬ 
lated). 

Nectar Ocean: wherever there is a Srlchakra, there is 
one nectar pond. There are two nectar pools in the city 
called Aparajita, the abode of the worshippers of the 
conditigned Brahman (see Chchan. Up., VIII, 5). The 3rd 
is in the Brahmarandhra (cerebrum) in the head. 



364 


LAL1TA SAHASRANAMA 


Poison : both moveable and immoveable ones. The 
Prayogas generally do not fail in their effects (nnless the 
practitioner is an ignorant one). 

27— 28. By taking batter mesmerised with this 
Sahasranama barren woman will surely beget children. 

Barren- wrjmen : There are four kinds of barren 
women, (11 one who has no issue, (2) one who 
begets children who do not survive, (3) one who begets 
female issue only, and (4) one who begets one issue 
only. 

28— 29. At night meditating on Devi, as binding the 
desired woman, by the noose and drawing by the elephant* 
hook, if one, recites the Sahasran&ma, she Gomes'to his 
si$e, even if confined in a harem. 

This relates to a story mentioned in the Mabatmya of 
Hanngun/.hapiiha : “ Chandravadana, the wife of the sage 
Narayana, was taken away by Seturaja, the son of Chakra, 
and she was brought back by the sage after worshipping 
Devi alone.” 

Some say this Prayoga is intended for other desired 
women also in order to test the (mental) power on other 
minds, and also to marry them to procreate healthy 
children. (See Br. Up., VIII-4-7). He should sit either 
Eastern or Northern-faced for this Prayoga. 

30. To conquer a king, one should turn to the side in 
which he (the king) lives and repeat this Sahasranama for 
three nights, fully devoted to the worship of Devi ; 

Three nights : Days and nights. One should repeat) 
always this Sahasranama till 24th Prahara (a day consists 
of- 30 Praharas) after concisely performing his daily duties. 
He may think on Devi as binding the king, &c. (see the 
previous verse). 

The king : any king he desires. 

31. And the king losing his independent spirit, rides 
a horse or an elephant to go to him (the devotee) t© whom 
he prostrates like a Servant. 



KALITA SAHASBANAMA 


365 # 

Rides a horse, etc. : He never comes alone like a thief 
but comes riding on horse back, etc. 

32. The king being thus controlled, offers him his 
kingdom and treasury. 

32— 33. By a mere gaze at the face of him who 
repeats daily this secret SahasranSma, the three worlds 
get bewildered. 

33— 35. The enemies of him, who repeat this 
SahasranSma with devotion once (at least), are killed by 
SarabhesVara. Any Black (magical) part practised against 
the repeater of this. SahasranSma (is ineffectual, but) is 
made by Prat-yangiras to rebound upon the performer of 
the act and kill him (instead). 

Prom this verse forward the prayogas are simple. , 

S'arabhesvara : an incarnation of Siva as mentioned 
in Linga, KslikS and other PurSnas, in order to destroy 
the Nrisimha incarnation of Vishnu. The Prayogas of 
Sarabhes'vara are well known in the Tantras. This 
Prayoga is mentioned here as the best destruction-Prayoga 
as it was the cause of slaying even Vishnu. This is 
indicated here : This powerful God, Sarabha, though he 
belongs to other spheres and not completely worshipped 
by the devotees of Srlvidya, and though unrecognised by 
many, strives himself to destroy his (devotee’s) enemies. 
Therefore the superiority of the devotees of Lalita over the 
devotees of S'arabha is established. The same rule is to be 
applied in the following Prayogas also. 

■ Any Black ( Magical) : S'yenayaga, etc., which cause 
the death of enemies unknowingly. 

Pratyangiras: The Bhadrakall deity belongs to the 
Atharva Vteda. She is described by 32 Rigs in the Saunaka 
Sakha and by 48 verses in the Pippalada. The Prayogas 
are known in the Narada Tantra. 

35—36. Him, that looks upon the repeater of this 
Sahasranama, with a cruel eye, soon does MartSnda- 
Bhairava make blind. 




®366 * LALITA SAHASRANAMA 

Martanda-Bhairava : an incarnation of Siva, born at 
Prema Pura, in the Karnataka country and whose fame had 
spread much in the Maharashtra country ; his mantras and 
Prayogas are described in the Mailara Tantra and in the 
RudraySmala. 

36— 37. The robber, who dispossesses the repeater of 
this Sahasranama of his property, is, wherever he conceals 
himself killed by Kshetrapala. 

Kshetrapala (see 345 name) : His mantras are known 
in the Tantras. 

37— 38. The learned man, who dares discuss or 
argue about the Vidyas with him, who devotes himself to 
the chanting of this Sahasranama, is at once made.dumb 
(held spell-bound) by Nakules'varl. 

Vidyas : 14 Vidyas. 

Nakulesvarl : Her Mantra is mentioned in the 
Aitareykranyaka. The holy Paras'urama has also mentioned 
it in his Kalpa Sfltras (X-37) and the Prayogas are known 
in the Prapanchasara, etc. 

38— 39, When a king makes war with the devotee of 
this Sahasranama, DandinI herself destroys all his army. 

Dandini : is well known in the Varafia Tantra. 

Destroys : by creating quarrels among themselves in 
the army, by removing others and by slaying some. Thus 
6 kinds of actions ton black magic) are mentioned in 
the above verses. They are described in the S'arabha 
Chintamani thus; “Alleviation, control, obstruction, 
enmity, separation and destruction.” The TantrSraja . 
says, “Protection, tranquillity, charm, success, conquest, 
and- -destruction. These are the six actions.” These 
are not described in detail for fear of elaboration. 
One is referred to the 23rd Taranga in the Saubhagya 
Ratnakara. 1 


> The MSS. with the 36 Tarangas (chapters) were secured by me 
and they are in the Baroda and S'&ntiniketan Libraries. 



XALITA SAHASRANAMA 


367 ® 


39— 40. If one chants this with devotion continuously 
for six months, the goddess of wealth will reside perman¬ 
ently in his house. 

Permanently : This is the wealth giving prayoga 
against the unsteady nature of the goddess of wealth which' 
she changes (on behalf ef the devotees). 

40— 41. If one reads this Sahasranama once a month 
(at least), or daily (if he can), or. (still better) thrice a day 
(if possible), the goddess of Speech will keep dancing 
forever on (the tip of) his tongue. 

41— 42. By reading this Sahasranama without laziness 
for a fortnight, women can be fascinated by a mere glance. 

KQ,maprayoga : This may be practised at night. 

42— 43. Persons accidentally coming in contact with 
him who has read this even once in his life-time, are freed 
from sins. 

43— 44. To the twice-born man who knows this Sahas¬ 
ranama should be offered food, cloth, money, and paddy, 
and never to any one else. 

44— 45. For, the wise recognise him to be the fit 
(recipient) guest who knows the Panchadasl, who worships 
the Srlchakra and who chants this Sahasranama. 

45. Hence to him and to him alone one should with 
effort offer presents, if he wants to please Devi. 

Him and him alone : Pulastya Smr. says, “ The Vidhi 
(injunction) is of four kinds, the 1st is whose results are 
not visible (adrishta, such as heaven, etc.) ; the'2nd is whose 
result is obvious (Drishta, i.e. , wealth, etc.) ; the 3rd is the 
result mixed of the above (one and two) ; and the 4th is 
whose source is (inferred) from reason.” So the qualifi¬ 
cations of «the recipients are the S'rlvidya initiation, the 
worship of Srlchakra, and the repetition of the Sahasranama. 

46—47. He who does not repeat the Sahasranama, nor 
knows the Panchadasl, is like unto a beast, and presents 
made to him are useless. Hence the learned should test 
the knowledge (of the recipient) and offer him any presents. 



0 368 LALITA SAHASRANAMA 

Teat the knowledge : Concerning the worship of Lalita 
and repetition of the Sahasranftma, according to the rules. 

47—48. Just as there is no Mantra to match with the 
S'rlvidya, no deity to equal Latita, so also, O Pot-born one, 
there is no SahaSranama equal to this hymn. 

49. With him who writes out this supreme SahaSra¬ 
nama in a book and worships it with devotion, Sundari 
will be pleased. 

This verse refers to those who are not the regular 
devotees of Lalita. The devotees are those who receive the 
Mantras, SahaSranama, etc., from the Gurus with the mean¬ 
ing and practise them. The Sruti says, “ He who knows 
the meaning of the words obtains all auspiciousngss and 
reaches the heaven, all his sins purified, by knowledge.” 
All his sins This indicates mere knowledge of words also 
produces some results ; therefore ‘writing, etc.,’will confer 
on him some good virtues (Punya) which will operate in 
the course of next births (if not in this), as indicated in the 
Tantraraja and other works. The acquisition of books also 
is a virtue. At the end of this work we are going to say, 
“ 0 Amba, this Bhashya is dedicated to thy feet. Thou 
wert the cause of this. This explains tfte meaning of thy 
names. Let this be for thy pleasure. May I be thy 
devotee. To him, who does not study this, nor read this, 
nor even acquires a copy of this, the worship of Lalita 
becomes useless.” 

50. Why so many words ? Listen thou, O Pot-born 
one ; in all the Tantras there is no hymn to be found which 
is equal to this. 

. . 51—54. Therefore should the devotee repeat this with 
much devotion. The good results accruing) from the 
worship of the S'rlchakra done once with the lotus, Thulasi 
flower, Kalhara, Kadambaka, Cbampaka and Jat! flowers, 
with Mallika, Karavlraka, Utpala, Bilvapatra, Kunda, 
Kesara, PStfala and other fragrant flowers such as KetakI and 
Madhavl, accompanied with the chanting of these names— 



LALITA sahasranama 369 

the results of such a worship are indescribable even by 
Mahesvara.. It is only Lalita that can realise (the 
greatness of) the results of worshipping Her (Sri) 
Chakra. 

Tulasl Flower : TulasI bunch and not the petal (Dala) 
of Tulasl. The phetkarini Tantra says, “ It is not desirable 
that the flowers or petals or fruits should be offered down¬ 
faced. They will create unhappiness. They are to be 
offered as they come out (from their stalks). They are not 
intended to be offered down-faced except on the occasion of 
Pushpanjali (a ceremony where handful of flowers are 
generally offered). But in the worship of Lakshaptija, etc., 
(one lac of flowers offering ceremony), one should offer one 
flower for each name. If the flowers are offered in collec¬ 
tion, the worship will not be called Lakshaptija.” 

Mahesfvara : The 4th, among the 5 corpses, (see name 
249) is not omniscient enough to understand the virtue of 
the worshipper. 

It is only Lalita ; if one does not observe the daily 
worship, he is not entitled to perform the optional cere¬ 
monies like the Ayushkara Prayoga (see supra, 23rd verse) 
and other flower offerings. The Prayoga is as follows : 
At the beginning of the worship of the Srichakra, one 
should recite thus, ‘as to get an unlimited virtue (Punya) 
I am going to worship Devi, by such and such flowers ’ ; 
then he should perform the Asana Pflja (seat worship) ; 
next he should recite the 1st chapter ; then perform the 3 
’ Nyasas ; next he should repeat each name-mantra in dative 
case, preceded with Om Hrim S'rim, and succeeding with 
Om, e.g., “ Om Hrim S'rim Srlmatre Namah Om,” and 

slowly place one flower as it came out (of the stalk) on the 
Bindu (of the Srlchakra) and continue the same kind of 
flower, without mixing it with another kind till the end 
(of the thousand names). Again at the end repeat the 
* Om ’ ; next perform the 3 Nyasas and repeat the eonclud 
ing chapter. Thus ends the Prayoga. 

47* 



370 


LALITA 8AHASRANAMA 


55—56. How can Brahma and other gods who have 
a limited knowledge know it ? He who worships the 
Supreme Devata in the S'rlchakra with these names on the 
night of the fall-moon day in every month, himself be¬ 
comes (one with) Lalita and Lalita with him. 

57—58. There is no difference between them both 
(Lalita and the devotee), and to draw any distinction 
between them is to sin. If a devotee worships Sri Devi 
on the MahanavamI day with these thousand names 
locating her in the S'rlchakra, his salvation is in his hand. 

To draw distinction : though there is a distinction 
between the worshipper and the worshipped, as the one 
is mortal and the other is immortal, and one is the 
worshipper and the other is worshipped, etc., with the 
different and opposed qualities, such distinction disappears 
and the worshipper becomes one with Devi, as the Advaita 
S'ruties are opposed to such differences. 

MahanavamI : This Prayoga is to obtain 4 kinds of 
salvation. In the Navaratra days (9 days) the 8th and 
9th days are called ‘ MahanavamI ’. In these two days 
the equal-essence of S'iva and Sakti occurs. In these days 
all classes of people, without exception are entitled to 
worship Devi (themselves). Navaratra is of two kinds, 
one is in the autumn and the other is in the spring season. 
The Markandeya Pr. says, “ The great worship is per¬ 
formed in the autumn season and at the beginning of the 
new year (spring).” In the 3rd book of the Devi Bhag. 
Pr. Devi says to SudarSana, the worshipper of KSmabija,. 
“ The great worship of mine should be always performed 
in the autumn season and also arrange to celebrate, accord¬ 
ing to the rules, the Navaratra festival. The great festivals 
of Navaratra should be celebrated by you at the months 
of chaitra and as'vayuj (the constellation of chitra and 
asVatl appear on the full-moon days), which will please 
me.” In the Saubhagya Ratnakara, the Navaratras are 
said to be observed in the ashadha and paushya (4th and 



LAMTA SAHASKANAMA 


371 


10th lunar months). The Mahanavami are the days of 
the 8th and 9th in the autumnal Navaratra, as described 
in the Kalika Pr. and said by Dhaumya. The Brahmanda 
Pr. says, “ The day, -when the sun goes to Kanya (the 6th 
sign of the zodiac) and when the 8th day joins with 
mttla constellation, is . called “ Mahashtaml If the 
mhla constellation does not join the 8th day, or the next 
constellation POrvashadha joins it, then also it is to be 
called ‘ Mahashtaml The Nrisimha Prasada says, “ In 
the bright fortnight of the As'vayuj month, the 8th day, 
joined with mala, or the Parvashadha, or with the (above) 
two constellations is called ‘ Mahanavami,’ and it is very 
difficult (to get one) even in the 3 worlds,” The Bha. 
Uttara, Pr. and Vis'varOpacharya confirm the same. Hence 
the theory that some hold that the Navami day only is 
called ' Mahanavami ’ is rejected. The Visit. Dhar. Uttara 
Pr. says, “ Whether the 8th day joins the 9th, or the 9th 
day with the 8th (according to preponderance of the days), 
the day is called ‘ half Devi and half S'iva, and the 
Umamahes'vara day.” Bhojaraja says, “ On the 8th day 
Rudra is to be worshipped, on the 9th Devi is to be 
worshipped.” Navami belongs to DmS and the ashtami 
to Hara. If these (two) days join together, then the holy 
day is called ‘ Uma mahes'vara day.” The same rule is to 
be observed in the spring Navaratra also. The worship 
is at mid-night. The Devi Pr. says. “ In the asvayuj 
month at the end of the rainy season, the Devi, the 
.slayer of inahishasura, should be worshipped at the mid¬ 
night on the 8th day.” The same the Saktirahasya and 
Vistvarttpacharya repeat. Some say the paja should be 
performed in day time on the 8th day, holding for their 
authority a passage from the Bha. Utta. Pr. But it is the 
chstom of the blindmen. To this pfija, all classes of men 
are entitled. The Bh. Utta. Pr. says, “ Devi should be 
worshipped in every place, in every town, in every house, 
in every village, by all able men, bathed, with enthusiasm. 



I.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


37 2 

by Brahmanas, Keshatriyas, Vais'yas, SAdras, by the devoted 
SJlechchas, and by every class of men on Earth, by women, 
etc.” The conclusion is, if one worships Devi at mid-night 
on the 8th and 9th days of the autumnal aDd spring 
Navaratras (total 4 days) in the Srichakra with the 
Sahasranama, the 4 kinds of salvation are in his hand ; that 
is, by the 1st day worship, he acquires the Salokya 
salvation ; by the 2nd day, Ssrfipya ; by the 3rd SSmipya 
and by the 4th day worship, the Sayujya salvation, 

58—61. Listen thon the result of worshipping the 
great Devi with this Sahasranama in the S'richakra on 
Fridays. All one’s desires in this world are fulfilled, 
he is attended with all prosperity and is blessed with 
sons and grandsons. And after enjoying all the desired 
objects he is sure to attain at the end the state of Lalita- 
S&yojva, which is hard to reach and which is also coveted 
by Siva and others. 

In this world : there is a saying “one will get 
immediately the result if he practises punya or p&pa 
(virtue or vice) without limit.” 

Prosperity : Progeny, wealth, health, knowledge, 
strength, etc. 

61—62. With him, who with devotion entertains, 
repeating this Sahasranama, a thousand Brahmanas with 
food consisting of Payasa, Apflpa and six kinds of Rasas— 
with such a person Lalita is pleased and gives him 
salvation (SSmrajya)’. 

Brahmanas : Possessed with knowledge and wisdom<. 
and not others. 

. Six kinds of Rasas : are all described in the Bhojana- 
kutfthala and in the Sllda S'astras (cookery). 

Samrajya: complete non-difference, i.e., baivalya. 
This is the opinion given out according to the followers 
of the Upanisbads, who declare except (the power) of 
creation, one gets dominion ever all other matters 
(see Ved. Sfltras, IV). In reality the word ‘ Svarajya ’ 



LALITA sahasranama 


373 


expresses conventionally, specially the rulership over the 
universe. The text here expresses the gift of that onljfc 
iest there would be the fallacy of abandoning the literal 
meaning and getting the meaning that does not belong to 
the text. So it is only fit to say the deserving result of the 
blessings of the thousand wise Brahmanas are above the 
result of the previous one (61 Slo.). One Should not be afraid 
of this theory that there would be a conflict of actions of 
different devotees, who perform this Prayoga simultane¬ 
ously and who want to exert their actions on the universe 
independently opposed to that of those whose minds (gener¬ 
ally) work on different lines. To avoid this (the author 
of the* Vedanta SOtras 4-4-17) describe: in that Kaivalya 
state one gets dominion over everything except on actions 
(of creation, etc.,) of the universe. (Answer). They (the 
Vedantins) themselves do admit that the actions, etc., of 
the Lord himself depend on the actions of the beings to be 
created ; else there would be partiality and non-compassion 
(on the part of the creater), which would be hard to be 
avoided. Hence the Vedanta SOtras (2-1-34) say, " There is 
no partiality nor non-compassion, for his actions depend on 
(the actions of the beings to be created), as the S'ruti says 
so;” Therefore there is no conflict of actions of many 
devotees which follow harmoniously in one channel, accord¬ 
ing to Karma (of the created beings) ; nor is there a loss of 
their independence, as they confine their actions according 
to each other’s wish. Hence there is a description in the 
>Va. Ramayana in the story of Kundadanta, of eight 
brothers in the rulership without break of this undivided 
earth, consisting of seven Dvipas, simultaneously owing to 
the boon of the Mother . . . The S'ruti says (Tai. Up., I, 6) 

concerning Svarajya, “ He ' obtains Svarajya.’ ‘ All Gods 
offer oblutions to him/ ‘ To them there is free accessibi¬ 
lity to all the words ’. . . ‘ He becomes Lord of speech,’ 

‘ Lord of eye-sight,’ ‘ Lord of hearing,’ ‘ Lord over the 
wisdom, etc.’ ” The Saunaka Sakha of Atharva Veda says 



374 


LALITA 8AHA8RANAMA 


plainly that the devotees take part in the creations, etc., of 
%e universe. “ He becomes the creator of all the universes 
and protector and he becomes the universal one.’ 1 
(Question). If so, Is he a separate entity from the Lord or 
no ? (Reply). In the doctrine (of Vedanta) there is a 
difference between the Lord and the freed-souls, one is the 
creater, etc., and the other has the dominion over all except 
that of creation, etc. In our doctrine (Devi) the difference 
is, one (the devotee) has mind and the other (Devi) is 
without it . . . The conclusion is the devotees of Devi 

has the power of creation, preservation and destruction, etc. 
Therefore the commentator of the S'aiva Sfttra (III-39) says. 
Thus the energy of his own bliss characterised by inde- 
pendance, freely becomes indeed, the cause of the created 
beings.” 

Thousand Brahmanas with food : the following is the 
prayoga. First practise the pranaySma ; then repeat the 
place, time ; next recite the Sankalpa saying ‘ To please the 
Maha Tripurasundarl, I will entertain one thousand 
Brahmanas in a certain number of days, with the thousand 
secret names, preceded with the Nitya Bali ’ ; then punya- 
havidhi ; then 16 Brahmanas are to be selected ; as soon as 
they arrive, offer water to wash their feet; then they 
should take scented-oil bath in hot water ; then they should 
sit in their respective seats. Each Brahmana should be 
worshipped with the name of each Nitya deity, beginning 
with Kamesvarl ending with Tripurasundarl, invoking 
each Nitya deity through each Brahmana, with 16 kinds of, 
Upacharas, according to one’s own ability. For illustration : 
“ Hrlm, S'rlm, Kamesvaryai namah, I invoke the Kames¬ 
varl, the 1st Nitya deity to be present in this Brahmana ; 
establish her in him, worship her, offer water to her 
(tarpana) ” ; thus the dry-rice should be placed on the head 
of the Brahmana. The same ceremony should be observed 
with the second Brahmana, 2nd Nitya deity, Bhahagama- 
lini (so on to the 16th). They all should sit either eastern 



LALITA S AH ASR AN AHA 


375 


or northern-faced ; next offer them seat, etc.; then offer 
them clothes, jewels, sandals, flowers, scent, light, etc.*; 
then feed them with food consisting of sweetmeats, milk 
pudding, fruits and other rich things ; last, offer them _ 
betel leaves, money and take farewell of them with 
prostration. The oil bath is necessary. Thus the Nitya 
Bali. In this way, the Thousand Brahmanas should be fed 
from the 2nd day forward. The Mantras should be recited 
as “ Hrim, S'rlm. S'rl Matre Namah,’ I invoke the presence 
of S'rl Mata in this Brahmana ; next seat him, etc., oil bath, 
etc., should be offered to the Brahmanas according to 
one’s own ability. The 1st part of the Sahasranama 
shduld* be recited at the beginning of the POja and the 
concluding part at the end. If one is unable to secure 
thousand Brahmanas at a time, the ceremony may 
be extended to some days more, till the thousand are fed. 
Till the finishing days, the devotee should observe vows. 
In the Tris'ati feeding observances, each day 20 Brahmanas 
should be worshipped (with food), from the 1st day of 
bright fortnight to the full-moon day, as there are 20 
names, each with 15 Mantras of (Devi). If one does not 
get the required Brahmanas, the days may also be extend¬ 
ed, till the complete 300 Brahmanas are fed. The full 
details were all dealt with by us in the Sahasra bhojana 
vidhi, a work based on the Baudhayana Sfltras. 

63—’64. If a person chants this supreme hymn with¬ 
out hoping for any (specific and selfish) result, there is 
nothing in all the three worlds which is unattainable by 
him. He gains Brahma-Jnana by which he will be freed 
(from all misery). He that longs for wealth will get 
wealth ; he that courts fame will get fame. 

Brahma Jn&na : the knowledge which removes the ; 
confusion of the difference between the Jlva and Brahman, 
arising from the Maha vakyas (.Transcendental phrases), and 
aiming at the Atman (Self) alone, in the shape of the last 
mental modification, and which is in the form of experience. 



376 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Freed : he will be freed from the bondage of ‘ I ’ ness 
and ‘ mine ’ which has come to him without beginning, as 
a net (to entangle). 

65. He that is anxious of learning (knowledge) 
becomes learned by chanting this Sahasranama. O Muni, 
there is no other hymn equal to this in merit which con¬ 
fers both worldly attainments and salvation at the same 
time. 

Learning : of the Vedas and S'astras, etc., with unlimit¬ 
ed knowledge, and not of Srlvidyl ; because the instruc¬ 
tion of S'rlvidya should be got from a Guru, and if one 
performs these prayogas without it, not only he will not 
secure the desired objects, but he will get into troubles 
also. 

66. This should therefore be repeated by persons 
desiring both worldly enjoyment and salvation ; also by 
those who are in (any of) the four As'ramas. 

In the four As’ramas : in order to fulfil their daily 
Karmas which in their performances generally become 
more or less (defective). This repetition becomes as an 
expiatory to all (such) actions (observed) by the 4 
Asframins. 

39th ParibhashS verse : (Of the remaining 20 verses) 
132 verses give out that the recitation is necessary ; 5| 
verses conclude (the book) and the last one is of Sdta. 

Of Snta : this indicates except the last verse, all others 
are of Hayagrlva. 

67—68. To make up for the imperfect performance of 
Dharma in this Kali age which is noted for the prevalence 
of sin and delinquency on the part of people to do their 
duty, there is no protective except the repetition of this 
Sahasranama. The repetition of Vishnu’s names is pre¬ 
ferable to ordinary talk. 

To ordinary talk : The Vishnu Bha. Pr. says, “When 
conventionally or in joking, or without meaning or in 
contempt, if one repeats the name of Vishnu, they say, it 



LALITA SAHASHANAMA 


377 

removes all sins.” The same is repeated in the S'ivarahasya, 
Devi Bha. Pr., etc., concerning the names of S'iva, Devi, 
etc., respectively. 

* 69. To a thousand names of Vishnu a single name of 

S'iva is preferred. To a thousand names of S'iva one single 
name of Devi is preferred. 

(There is a description about the different aspects of 
Vishnu and of S'iva and their gradations which ends thus :) 
“ The heart of Brahma is Vishnu ; of Vishnu is said to be 
of Siva ; the heart of S'iva is Sandhya (Devi). Therefore 
she should be worshipped by the twice-born ones.” 
These gradations are supported by the Kdrma, Padma, 
Skandjk, Devi, Kalika, Brahmanda and Markandeya and 
other Puranas. 

70. There are crores of sets of thousand names to 
Devi, 0 Pot-born one. Of these, ten sets of thousands are 
the best. 

10 Sets : These ten sets are those of 1. Ganga, 2. Bha- 
vani, 3. Gayatri, 4. Kali, 5. Lakshmi, 6. Sarasvati, 7. Raja- 
rajes'vari, 8. Bala, 9. Syamala, and 10. Lalita, indicated by 
the letters of Gam, Ga, Sya, La, Ka, Ba, La, Ra, Sa and 
Bha (irrespectively). 

7.1. And of those ten sets of names (each of thousand), 
this holy one is the best. Therefore it should be repeated 
daily to ward off the sins of the Kali age. 

72. The ignorant do not recognise this hymn of Devi 
as the best. Some devote themselves to the names of Vishnu 
.and others to those of Siva. 

73— 74. Rarely one in this world is devoted to the 
names of Lalita. It is" by repeating the names of other 
deities in crores of births, that faith is generated to repeat 
the names of Sri Devi. 

74— 75. Just as it is in the last of all his births that a 
person devotes himself to S'rividya, so it is that the 
repetition of this Sahasranama is taken to by him whose 
(present) birth is the last (or who is to have no more births). 

48* 



378 


1.ALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Devotes himself, etc. : identification of Guru, deity, 
mantra and himself as one. This instruction is to be 
obtained from a Guru alone and not from boohs. The 
Guru is he who instructs the student with the full initiation* 
(POrnabhisheka) and he is to be called Paduka (Sandalh 

75— 76. As there are only a few who know the 
method of S'rlchakra worship, even so there are only a 
few who chant this Sahasranama. 

76— 77. The practice of S'rividya, the worship of 
S'rlchakra and the repetition of this holy Sahasranama are 
not attainable by a slight penance. 

77— 78. He that wishes to please the great Itfvarl 
without chanting this Sahasranama, is like one, .who is 
confounded and wants to see objects without eyes. 

78— 79. He who aims at attaining Siddhis except by 
means of this Sahasranama is indeed like one who tries to 
satisfy hunger without taking food. 

79— -80. The devotee of Lalita should always repeat 
this ; and in no other way can Devi be pleased, even for 
crores of years to come. Therefore should one chant this 
secret Sahasranama of the holy mother with devotion. 

81. Thus, 0 Pot-born one, is this secret hymn 
declared to you. You should not impart this to one who 
is not initiated into the S'rividya nor to one who is not 
a devotee. 

82. Just as S'rividya is to be kept secret, so also, 
O Muni, this (Sahasranama) should be kept concealed from 
the eyes of the uninitiated. This holy hymn ought not to, 
be promulgated among those whose nature resembles that 
o£ beasts. 

83. If a person so loses his wits as to impart this to 
one who*is not initiated into S'rividya, the Yoginis curse 
him and it is a (source of) great loss to him. 

84. Therefore should this Sahasranama be kept 
concealed. Even to thee, 0 Pot-born one, I did not declare 
it of my own accord. 



379 


LALITA SAHASEANAMA. 

O Pot-lmrn one (Kalasl-suta) : Kalasl = Devi, and Suta =■ 
son. By the strength of devotion, Agastya has become 
to that stage when the devotee is called ‘ the son of Devi ’ 
(a special privilege of the devotees of Devi alone). 
Ysdava says, ‘ 5 Kala means parrot (in nue.), decayed (in 
mas.) and charming sound (Nada).” S'i—te recline, i.e., 
Devi is called Koalas'!, as she is to be realised in the charm¬ 
ing sound. Rabhasa says, “ Kalas’a means the best of 
things, the head and the pot.” As she is the head or the 
best of all, she is called Katas’!. 

85. It is by the command of Lai its that this holy 
hymn is declared to thee. Therefore, 0 Pot-born one, 
do tho A chant this always with devotion. 

Chant this always : you are not only in the 1st stage 
of a devotee, but are fully initiated (P&rnabhisheka). 

40th, the test verse. Thus the collection of the 40 
verses was composed by the learned Nrisimha Yajvan, 
indicating the tradition of the great ones, to please the 
devotees of Siva, Sivam. 

86. Thus pleased, the great Devi will grant thee all 
desired objects. 

Stlta said : 

86 and h Having thus instructed Agastya, Hayagriva 
meditated on Mother Lalita and got himself merged into 
the bliss, when his hairs stood on their ends. 

Thus ends the third Phala chapter in the Uttarakhanda 
of the Brahmanda Purana, in the form of a dialogue 
between Hayagriva and Agastya. 

Here ends the twelfth Kala called Kshama with the 
Phala chapter, in the Saubh-igyabhaskara composed by 
Bhaskararaya. 1 


1 Lately I waited on His Holiness, the present S’ri Jagat Guru of 
Sringeri Mutt, who is on his tour in the South ; and he said that the 
division of Kal&s into 12, might be due to the identification with 
the 12 Kalfis of SBrya (the Sun). 



380 


LALITA SAHASRANAMA 


Born in the ViSvamitra-gotra there lived in Kas! a 
person named Gambhlra, the best of all learned men, who 
was devoted to the worship of S'iva and who performed 
Soma-YAga (sacrifebe). By his son, on Monday the ninth 
(Navami) day (Tithi) in the Sukla pakshaP (bright half) of 
the lunar month of Asvija with sacred season (autumn) of 
the year Kslayukti, corresponding to 1785 of the (Samvat- 
sara) year, this commentary on LalitS SahasranSma was 
written. 

Though this commentary is written with the help of 
the knowledge gained from S'ruti, Smriti, rules of Logic 
(NySya), PurSna, Slitra, Kos'as (lexicons), Agamas, and the 
hereditary teachings of Gurus, yet it is hoped that wiser 
men (than me) who have compassion for me (sympathize 
with my undertaking) will correct this whereever 
necessary. 0 

There may be several defects in this commentary, due 
to my imperfect knowledge, or errors may have crept into 
it owing to my carelessness, or because the text is too 
difficult to be understood thoroughly, and I therefore crave 
the indulgence of the great and compassionate souls to 
remedy them all. 

0 mother, this BhSshya which purports to explain the 
meaning of Thy names and to write which Thou hast been 
instrumental, is dedicated to Thy feet. I trust it will 
therefore be acceptable and pleasing to thee. Let him, 
who does not study this, nor read, nor at least possess a 
copy, indeed O LalitS, not have faith in thee. 

Victory be to my Gurus whose one single name 
enabled me to cross the ocean of this SahasranSma, just as 
a drop ot,water from of their holy feet enabled me to cross 
the ocean of SamsSra. 


Om Tat Sat 



JwrctsorR: 




?!f^n^iT«r^f n \ \\ 

MI^+NI ^T^Wd: 'Tflft^PR. I 
qugi^q gfa -f^oi || ^ || 


II 3. II 


«iWft4l RHT anw>ll#(ll: 
3RT#RR^ ^fp^WTFRT II 8 II 



Rf!WMthR«iR RRIMRT: | 

g*«rcupRn% 5 n ^ n 

<RRT qtffit CrR^faf^SR: J 
f^lTRT: ?f^o?n l^|%RnRTRfr: tl ^ II 
RKFR | 

R|rftRT: *jpR: qR^Rdl: II o || 
R^% RTR?lf 8 % I. 

R 3 *fW«dl<\oRl: Rft> RlRRfyRIH, II II t 
rr R rrr^ Rrat fRsftR ^rtRiR i 
f% RT <RRT f^?R rfjfMT RT 33^%!^ || ^ II 
RR RT R^RRT RtRr ^ RTRRpRJ^ | 
f^ RRRT RH> RR % RTFRR R^ || \ o || 

TJjT 3RTR—•- 

?fR ?gt |R?flRt sRlRT §R(M?RR| 

RfR* RRR RTf RTTO §*RRRR3 II H II 
sftfRjffa 3RTR— 

#Rg3TR^SR^R RTRRTRRRT: ^ I 
Rfli Rft R#fi RIRoj Rg^rfJr ^ || ^ || 
<^RtRi R^Rrt RTrjrt# R 5 RFRR7 I 
3 R«T RRtRT R^RTR% RSfFRfR. II \ V II 
RRlf^RTR RR5TR ^RRft I 

RRRT R R^R ^RT^RRRR RiRTRR || || 





«T 5RER »T q>fff^ I 

sffaig^f&gTfnq ^ORkirn^^ || ^ || 
swkm»r 

*TTft HRW^ff&l fafelRTpI % || ^ || 
<#(^JI^I^ ^(+K 3^ I 
sftfMfa 3 *T^Ftt W II ?vs l| 

JOPUlt sftg*l*H STrtffat Sf^IT I 
,«0f^MI^HiWi R *WT ^ 3*: f^R: II %C | 
WW q^cRR>tf&R, I 

ifN^ || \ % || 

MliW sfR^ rRT I 

«frni: cURRRRT || ^ o || 

foriM**W><I'il 5^i^@(«d|(t*i«i>|^ | 

rrr ?r I 

^*l'f^K'N , *TR J ®4 5TCRT II || 

^T'TFrT <fO<$lftR*lPK 'fRti&ty'KH. I 


^T'TFrT ^wTtvf^TFR 'fRti&ty'KH. 1 
5W'ifil^l’*^ivi|| ^3. || 

fl?ffl3% fllipft cRST^RTg I 

f| S: II || 

%% *u+wg$i g qfl$i i 

^?FT •nut r qft&R. ii ^ n 



*FcftR 


*IR<4l^l'l»W«in v It R ^ II 
JWnft 525 R fWH I 
31 T sftefttot ’WRt f^FFTO || ^,v9 H 




^i'lN— 

5 2>gs3 ^T *PT II II 
*RRt JRTOT^f I 

*!&ThHT ^Tf^^jjrPRFl II II 

*TH^T *R HWM<WU||: I ’ 

*R wlflf'NHR <WKl^Mlft m || ^o || 

*PT ’TPW^ff^: | 

$R *1%: ^TRT *1 3U: jftfrl: TO ^ II \\ It 
fqsffa — 

fRWHT q-q|<\°Ml ^<R( ^^f^rlTRRT I 

wtangw* II \\ II 
^W P WHU ft l Wi I 
p: ^iR^Rl fto It \\ II 

WteHW STRlW^i I 

^T^TTiRIW »*JI»n sUf^fe^: II W II 
^ffrrrrcwRt r distort: 1 

Si*MWft to: II ^ II 





«n: | 

ftPwi+KMwi 3W ^ II ^ ^ II 
■f^Hn *TH^n«j ftngNrar gwpraT: i 
*#ri it \*s n 

^3 csImR^ £r # **n% ^pjw^. i 

«f(^i»OjiHi ^i^R^iwi i 
.^T^nWIfl: *q gl$fenP«H> | ^ || ^ || 
«pT wat^Rwr i 

3 faFPT *pi$ ?T?fo ffelcTT: II tf O II 
^ra: tffodl ^^iA^HIUIW. | 

— 

*Wf*N ^sq«r^: || V ? || 

31%T «JWf5|RsS|4i» | 

cRq &i m 3 ? *re ft % 3$ ii ii 

src&r^ *t%3 w i 

^ ^ *ra>: *r§^ ii v\ ii 

^ fiW<Wl 5kWK<N^ I 

sffa% iff sp^T II S^ll 

^ gE^ - 1 

^T *TT 3T t^lt ^ ^T «T ^T || II 
JRsft^T srm #OT: II V<\ II 



— 

?fa sfrf^^TTJft ^T ^dR^I^IK II t'S II 

d^^TCT dS[RWT ^ftwg*r^T: I 

51^ ^ 3W3ffl$3 II VC H 

q?^T WTT *Td#<3&dmR35«t I 

dtH K«M *frf?f qj|«5»fldf*i<i 3^ II V% It 

3n«reqq>& *ptt qfaBt i 

s^pft dTTOii^ q^nRf si^tt sjg 11 ^o u 


•^Nrl: II 


(3*q ?ft 5#W^TTq^t^TT^FF^WT I qfil^lR- 
dl^ddl ^T: I si^fT I ’i&f^dWtenft ^clT | 
sftjPI, I J T^T^5i% SlRh: I ^iRh^Rl qft- 

«TR2$ RlPl'Mld: I JJ-SHF^T <Rq33«{|«H[. fr^l) ^ 


TOim^rl 1 

^r«i wPsfdiwRqaB Pr^rft 
*tNt ^TFRq?;wPd=tii^ it ii 


f fcT 3trc?3 n % ssftf*pftqpre?Rf3J% 

sflaRwHiJW^q^Mft *iw 

5r«iifts«ri?r: u 



^Rn4Hg?raT 


( 3«J*S.H^W 


Mo II 





li^i^Tl II U || (30) 



^sOMRf^iHOH^Il+Ptefa'fil | 



Wcfl^HWl II Ro II 





ssiwraft i ( 50 ) 

■Rw+!^«R7f^lT f^RT wflqwu II W II 
^^'aROPWT sfatSlWfRl'bl | 
faaral&HKRw wwiKMforaT II ii 
W*w^^n <«*wwRhf) i 
^rwrowiT (eoj^prwjt'.^woPpft w \\ II 

H^<i R-t^sM*} fad l I 






II ^ II 



mnfMn 




: I ( 80 ) 

3»T*Nr<Tfcr Pl'J. , *7'FW J ^I^^ Pi4> I (^ArM <s hl) I 

WTW: | 

\ II VA II 


fSra&WfaiiJ ( 90 ) f S titew i foO II U II 
jJi^lsWl fSI ; r(W 3 i«4),Ri*0 I 
RfST WTRT«-TT e q ^ TRI WW I II || 

^FriWft^T smarf^*rf^ft i (ioo) 

n ii 

t i 

t iWfTCTfafWt ii ^ ii 
: sftsRIT | 


fosfaft (no) faragaiforcfl' ii »o h 

wft *rqR®rf 5 Tf^T i 

^r?f^TT ^TR^TRJI^Tf^ft || » { || 

*fWarr vrfrfisr^n (120) writ i 

arorcr^T sFrfat sp^tM ii »* ii 



i 

( 130 ) snfcRRft Prtstrt £rsrt n y \ \\ 
ft&n Pi4«i ftsrr Priori Priest i 
P)$ u ll PlH<*l (140) 3TRTT PiHWI pRjMiMI ||*i || 
Pl^Ttii PlR'fiKI pRTSRTT | 

pRfST PR^RJT (150) pRRRT || tfH || 
ft^feRwiI Pl^fT pR'TtPl f^t^T l 
>^ftTPTT CRRRHT f^T R^lftlJft II II 
fSrf^T (160) PftfrRT M?T qfcnfaifl | 
pRtRT *RRTT^t PHhl qFHlf^Rft II Vvs || 
pR#TT Sfi^WRft'ftsfar (170) ^WTMt | 
PtRfeRfT *RPRft pP^T WnfM II «< II 
Pl(w?Hl PKMRIT PPfeT I 

‘pPrfsBT (180) pRqpRfT II II 

Pl*3«M •ffafa'fO pRMRH pR^RfT | 

5&TT S’WT 5*rf-(190) 3 : SPft II II 

d^f^TT I 

R%T RRRnPR^RT || H? || ^ 

fl$HpCT*ft (200). RjCppRT | 

*#9$ R^Rft II. HR II 

ti^'^ilw+i *Hi*H*f) i 

«n%=«rft *lfRMt( 210 )fepPlT || w || 



*HWWI || II 

JJfmFTT t&’mi (220) J^T#«T *t4N<st | 

<W.lRlfe 4*l^NNft || || 

RfRF^T iffW^T *JfR5WT I 


"TF^ft m4H«WI 'F5RTWIW II || 
’T^rfFFTRfRT I (250) 

(Vh4) || ^ || 

WFfWFf^lWn *wfa4ft«iFjktl | 

f¥aw 4wR4l ^T^ft d^nRn^t n h 






IfeforteRR: 


n 


qTOfr WEft WRI^ II II (280) 
l^w i faragq q refe : i 
spraftfopn II ^ II 

f^iJsiwPHWi swnjwrR^r 11 ^ II 


T II II (290) 


gS’TT^SRT ’JJlf I ' 

srfa^JT ^iRPiw ii s^ u 

HKWffl ?n^TT ^R^mRh ftdl | (300) 

4l$l(l po ^HI^RpWI || Oo II 

U'SKMlRdl ^TT <T<J04<5HHI I 

isnft (310) <RT gU faftPlfete l II o^ || 

rt <RM£<khi <Ri^4i c^rt i 

WjreO. wnft <RT «qui3*44T || o^ || (320) 

4HRT <MW&HWI ^RflSpTflRT I 

4*HW0 '^kO+'HI 4>$UII<009KI || o3 || 

HWRcfi ^P-FTT 4TRTT 4»RR$fiRT | (330) 

^T «H«H«WI «IK>uf|*i<f^®| || oy || 

•fcaifoST <)<$^i I 

toft ^pRsft $™PTRT RtfllM II OH || (340) 


60* 



^Wt ^r^PTTl^ti i 
^Tff^ftirBT amqi55«^Rrll II V9^ R 
f^SRfT IdR^I «F?TT I 

^tM (350) TO%tit ^iWWlfoft II ovs | 
RRfcR^H^fd'M MyiraR4lP^«f| | 

^pmTiw wwi#pt ii v»<j n 

dHRKMI d^R^TT (360) ddliiM^l || vs*, | 
fNfd ^I^^TTsrf | 

HR^ FP g^^^f tT W Ff ^ df rl : II <;o || 

CRT R^Rcft M^ddl I 

(370) %3^<TT ^RRRRltte tl <£ ? II 
^pteHMIURT^t f*I?T Wj^rTT I 

jgWR^ra’i^ ^n^rd^RiT ii <c\ n 
^nwftsf^n i (380) 

^TTWTRFRT TfW'kdffidl II C\ || 
R?T:SRr[f^ft | 

. , R^^ddl^-dj] NIs^RlR'iRdl H CZ || 

RFrfWvn Riwtt I (390) 

PrdJWWRl*bl^;Tl «fl'h*Jil^ORoff || C\ || 
iRTT^ft RRTffTT 5#1T I 

Hj*Mt>(d oR-d>(o«<Tt»^^M II II 



fafo ft guw : V\ 

(400) ftfimw r ft qr lfrwreM i 
ii <jvs ii 
Rf: | 

ftl^fl RhKI^T f$Ig*£$: f^F^t II <i<; II 
toPwi l^mT (410) Mst fa g gfc n- i 
sp^tt ^mroi ii ii 

f^-^frh &irH I^M l 'j|'S^lRt> '4g|(Ml I 
• JTPPJft (420) saTTfft: *F«TT II II 

MM tfrW4t (^-^-3PfT) M^=h)*IR<fWf I 
ftsfrwftm (430) n^rfMt \\ %\ ii 

*^023^^: 1 
^l^f^fM^T || V. II 
f5I3T %to3TSHT{T fSfgT f*Nff I 
f^osr^T (440) II II 

$*IK*|iiRWP*T 3ft: gffe I 

STTfcf: ^Tf^r (450) f?ISFTTf^ft II 

^Nrft '^FFFTT I 

gf*Fft *TRTT || ^ || 

gg^ft J rf^ft (460) gw: pw gFTTfw i 
'bl«w u <fl ^T^rFcft g^^fqiifl || <?,& II 
rn&\ 3%^lfalf3RiT I (470) 

(ti4*iwi *rerfMt 11 ^ n 



n %<z || 

c rFT?rr? : rf£PTT (480) <&m\ ggafawNiA i 


T Ilfafatft II «,*. II 
^TFrnrr i 

^^55T s$RT3lfe«TCT ?f^ftaRn II? o o ||(490) 
n \ o \ ii - 

«Kdd<w^ril | 

'Mlft'bl^N^dl SPTqffefiw^dl II ? oR || 

4.ti>c|uiI irref^rgT (500) gsTspffcRprcfT i 
*w^pi^&§w ii \o\ II 

^rrf^gRPfjRraT - 4344 ^* 1)^1 i 

'fPnwr sfcprf^T ii \ 8» n 
^iftgT *rfifcn (510) s rf ^ T foqqfaa i i 

^T%?ft^q«rrRof) n \ H 
H^NKI^I^I 1^4441 sf^raf^T I 
srefsnf^rsw ^rf^rtf^T n \ o^ ii 
g^fWrTrf^n tf|^HM#fi I (520) 
^l^tH4i|o^iPi^| ^$4»i|i ^l*MI || \ ov$ |l 

sftjfl$wRw»T fifo^wnM ii ?o<r ii 





T* 

flWrotfalT I 

(530) ^8^1 II \ 6% [| 

II \\ oil 

3<HH0Pd: 3WR5«n go^eHH^n^Hi | 

S^HpMI ^(5jf)W || \ U II 

f¥l\ f^Rjf^sPftSRi; I (550) 
^4^PMiRuft 'ii - ? ^ ii 
WF^rr sf^^i ^f^75*mrf5pft i 
«l>MW*ft ^q^T^RTT ii \\ \ II 

I (560) 

5¥TT , 53T?ft II \ \ » II 

Pi^hi feft ftfa&stft i 
&»nft«IKMW*rT (570) q c Wg * W Tf%qft II (h II 
Wftgl Sf^PFlJPSfqoft I 
*n«f|qMW«l *TffT II \ II 


JTf#n (580) 5^<jf3 %THWF^mf^ft II ^va || 

^nwf^TT sftf^lT =fr I*!*} fall I 

sftqtesn^tfH^rr f?r$zT n \ \ <: n 

f^:ft*RTT ^FsEf^RT VWW ^:SRT || \ ^ II 



^RjFnft kmrf ^^IM f Ri«fl n H® ii (600) 


P# jHftft #TcIT 3pRT*j;: || ^ \ || 
^J*«flRiWT ^T^RT^ftoft I 
Mftq^WhbMfaRw'J<S?l#1dl || ^^ || (610) 
't)^lfrH't>T ^®RT«n $1^ |55mft«#4) | 

arrf^TffR # SS9TT qw IWlfft; I 

(620) f^rf^T || II 
tjfolfl %^T JpIT | 

f^T f^n ft# ft##r ii ii 

(630) ftwwr ft^ft^lftldl 1 
3*n l#^RT ^T##<TT || || 

ft^rprf ## Si^T qpftftrft I (640) 
uiwm^-O sqfts^T ^TR^T jJRftjRTT || ^v9 || 

#T33jf% || \\£ || 

(650) ftfftt ift#raT I 
#1^ %r[t #rr #r^tf ^n^Ri ii \\ 


fl#RT fSfftgT (660) O^^mRuH II \\o II 





U 

■'OTfart HJWO f%T IrRfSRT || || 

3RRT Wl^T (670) 13T iH H &WKWM I 
Iftft srauft STift SUFF^T gt^RT || \\\ || 
^RI^MI fg#n ^RWRPrRm! l (680) 
tfclKI’RT 5pR^t ^RT^^Hlfcl: II \\\ II 
<M<lRi»fl *T3*RgRT | 

XMc&MI ^rffef^^Rf^RTf?RT || \\u || 
^FR^ft: ^Wffl (690) | 

^WI^<lRf»0 SR3P1T II || 

%WI5ft | 

<04^0 Slf^l «'f^R^(M«n II \\% II (700) 
<^RjI«M4RR*$iHI *0TT I 

?RRrft srraMt gfjRT ’pr^pjft ii II 

^Rkrf^ftirfiT *RTf^R'TfdsRI I 

(710) *n«ft (flTf-f) II 

*RRTRT *TRT *T^Tcft *0 | 

mm s^rtrt (720) $mr£\ gsfan it \\% u 
«M^T1 *0F^ft ^f^PFFjf^Wt I 
W^iRtoWI Rw?|HM<[Rcfl II ^ « O II 
fa<3>3T SSq^pRRiT i|^MI (730) f*Rg?ft I 

fRRWffer jtN^t ii \«\ ii 



sf^a lRh#Wl 

^fspn sran (740) re i jjftfina i \\w\\ 
M4<Wi41ffk: MIMNWHWHcH I 

^TM 1*1*fait4T || || 

^TF^lfa^Psi+l *tTbfaiTfa)fa>«Hh«tl I 
<9144^4) &J?P5J5lR$[ II II 
ft (750) ifpSTFrr *TfT3RT I 

awnrf =^f^T =^13^11*Prifaifl II W ||‘ 
^RTSKlpH+l fl4<#l%$ft 'fawRoft I 
fWMt (760) J*ET=mRw ftjoilfaWT IIWII 
wfowfel ^T ^MTS^Pwigifrl: I 
afcqfaft ffcFFT JfWTT fsTCEcTT II *8\9 II (770) 
5*KT«TT ETS^JEfiRT I 

Hfcft iteftsaiT JFStKfl’TfsRT II X'iC H 
=fl*KI>^T fa*|s4l fa<4l 'fa J ^3 , ^t I (780) 

RcWn H*H)|^IT Mf°KI JfFI^Wt II II 
JTMfe^rTTTW I 

fasfcft ^nF^n ftijpn t^t n ^*> n (790) 
fl^RH^TT flWWFKWOU | 

+mR 4] qj^WHi qrR^ffaft n II 
'hcMfafa: +M'h<AI WfT Rf: I (800) 

JET 3*FRT JRT J^RT IfqR^IT II It 







•KTWT I 

Mwtwi (Bio) m^\ wR^ft ii M • 

*|jrf S*|$rf 5pK4<iH! I 

O^MI ^W^iRCJfl || H (820) 
Wfoft W *n?Fft «l^m jfNlRnt | 

SRTfMt Rwr SSjfTT g%T SpRTffrl: II ? V\|| (830) 
RFt^t m«Ki<jO i 


^^nrTT faRSRj;: 11 II 
3f^T gfaftwT i (840) 

»n^T || ^V3 II 

3*?:STRT 3TTWRT 3^KI | 

'S^K'hlR || || (850) 


$TRaftflrl+<!>lfMl II II 
*Nftr *i»HF?n=«n 3 %t HHtftgqr i 
'♦xrMHKRdl 4>igl i#>WI (860) 4>Ml4f4*i£i || $ ^ o || 

+l44>l<«IPl4 T t»l | 

*HwiKll<l*l cflcHR*l§»iiRuft II W II 
^Tt^rfiT gRJT | 


s*ft Erc4ft3*ri f§rc*n ft y u rfrO I 

■RrWTT RrT^T gwjfcl: || || 


51* 







f | (880) 

*TfPff ^^PTFR^Wt II If 
SR^HT * F NFlfoi$«0 I 

ftafalT f^TT || K ^ || 

RWH (890) %TTOT Wft I 

spftfa 4lPlPi<?MII fJ^IT || \%% || 

sfrritetfofT *fftT ^Fsrf (900) TOWt I 
foiM'txsil *m\ f^FT I^PSRT II ? ^v9. |i 
^TfW 3T3Wh3$ftuft : | 


«T*PiRfJWT (910) *rofta$3P*fl II \ %<: || 
flsqiqflswfen' S*fofePWTRu|| I 
Wl ^T II X W II 

^PTT^WRT^n I 

fKlfcdl (920) WlgKT rt<?UllRc«lMl4ci»l II II 

^^pn^orRMT i 

#fM%^5T II II 

^frRcft ^fd^t^d'WlI | 

JRfMt (930) »I^ft W^Tftcf: II II 
Riwtit 5r*r^pft ferr^fr %rRpft i 
SPFRT qW^FT qF^T (940) *T%T?ft II II 
srf^foft qw%^ i 

MTOfi Rl HtfkHWlRraTppft II II 



q^pft i (950) 

srraft siFal’sraf ?i^t it U'a \\ 

«w *RgaT «pn *rfM i 

(960) gWRfttt SOlfataT II Wtt 

^f ! Ffl J TWlT 3T3T ^1 Raft'd I 

gsrefl #m®n n u* it (970) 

^TRpHNflftaT S^Tt*RT I 

f^l^P Ri g gT #0 II \*t II 

^I35[FWRT«n Rj$TT#reMt I 
?F5i[T ^|RJl«n (980) II W II 

4) tei ftgoiT s*^t i 

SRSfl S^HTft^T «uR®6l*liKlRl*ft II \ <£ ° II 
span^nRRRWT (990) w^Rfla^ftoft'i 
f II UMI 

^MIcHlfaftf^lT SrafcpfSRIW'tT I 
<CNiWwfi R H n iforfa^ 4 ^ II UR II 
sORmi Rw i *WPmn 3 fearfu l n s «^R luiooo 

^rt «ftW5n°?5pRl StR^ 

«fldRwrafSMWRflR«*w rt« 

%foftS«n*r: ll 





^ 94 ^ i 

W^u u&t =* «Rwpn%m^ ll \ II 
*t *jji ,«t ^rf^rfcT i 
fl4fr|SRWi fl^'Rqq’^ II ^ || 

*r4'j^fRtew»i sAqig^q^iq^g, n \ n 
g^qg^TFTt gWI^f^g I 
|? f%?t 1 TFSft^T: ^q sftf^fqqTWI. II \? II 
qq^q c5fadtolRrftkq{: I 
qFT: ^TR^T f^TT^T WM q II ^ II 

gq^lt ’FqT W'CN | 

fan q^q qi fam sicffa m n <\ n 










*M^ v 3f q i^Rqs^ §sft: || vs || 

?m jjg si f**rcw I 

iiwrftsWs q : n <: n 

*T d: fdfeftgr&% | 

3 4t 3[?n^tf^R ti <*> n 


d: mRiR«i II H H 


«r^*n 'R’tt 


d^+lf^sfura ii H 

*fFHFTflTfd <*Tl4dK I 

^WWIf^ dl*tadft d: <1^ II II 

d^T WlPf d^dPd dfFdfft d d?ld: I 

d^TTO ^lldd gdT ddf4 d^dfd s|dd. I 
dgdld f^gifid 525 rd dsd^ftgd || II 
3ltdidT*dt dT 5lf%>: TTd^Rt Pld<^ I 
df?ldt4dd d»t dT® #FT«rg% II ^11 
dwwi uddi^i 4jq^iPw+flmfa 1 

d ft dftdfafrdd ftdlfa II *0 II 







5»ciR«n lftdi+ne ^■^Ri h ? c u 
^ «TrBt vrf^rRf I 


$m ^Tt^TRTfB: II ^ H 

<i*t»i'dl R# % ^n=*ri%^s^ i 

3T ^jJ^TT RldWi ^i'h'UtU || ^ O II 
^ft^NTTTOTf^ 4Vwi«li R^tW. I 
ttlWI x)^R<R «TR^T 3f|^Rdl(*«H>W^ || 1(1 
q^rpra^ps^ i 

d*TT: SfOI^rf^T ^ Rp^Rf II ^ II 

Wlf^ "TFf 5|%T: I 

f^irf^r ^i|T q^iprcipre^ n ^ 11 
^c^TOJI^R ZfTfrf Rkw^ ^ i 

p^RrRrfr^ ^?|T *ip? *RR<^ ii ^« ii 
rTSWTWT^ 5 T^Tf^f | 

#F5q Jpipsi JTFWIf^t 5^ II 1l 
cf^roi I 

l*TWFR*T^9*«ri «n^T sf)<$RwifR=Kl*< II ^ II 

v: 'N ^ RwRt 1 


^STHT 3355FTPT JTPPnpwR^^ II ^ II 
3^5T*Tt I 

^n: ^wwr^tsT ^ ii n 



3?fo?rs«re»: 

^wifd *n m n ^ n 

S ?TdT <J?W fl *RfSR3, I 

sii^hiRi f^R»i sjra^srf&FM ^ n ^ ? 11 

d$ ^ ^ <WMh ^r TRf: i 

•^WFHHi&H V: tof: || || 

fl^fi<aNw&<J| 3^ I 

dFTCnfd flfdJSfd HfrPTT3. II \ ^ H 
d^T % Pl^-dl 3?IT*r^: I 

dt dTtot JTTWi^rcrre^ n \v \\ 

dR^i | ^13 I 

^ sh<ilWI *TTWIf^TT^j3 II \*\ II 
dl»F^]^<?^ f^PT ^PT d IdR^tq: I 
dd dt l| || 

dd Ifd to WTft ^TM fdfPd d3 I 
toi fdd did fdgrawsrrftdT 11 ^ 11 
d^r droto differ df&srft 1 

^ <HI ^d dldwi^i'Jilftdi II \<Z II 

dH dtoft 1 

d: dtoddTf^ d^rra nto^d: 11 ^ 11 



g?T fggpi g^| I 

WSf&b gprf4g Hot g: 'I^vR: II «o H 


^TRrft rT^T HfpT ^ Pi^RT: I 
«I^H <repl <^RR*igPsd: II V \ II 
guPg gnggw J jgT$ggrcg 4twg^ i 

W. 'T^TOTW# ?!fSR: || II 

d^lsg^f: g4 9^T% I 

4t %1% dWdl^« ggl || V\ 11 * 

'SRI =T^ OT OTg <IH^ 'frdl’H J 
sffaRRTg 4t %f% sffag g: gJT#f || »» II 


g: gftfcfg gidlPl 4 fd^dl: | 
g$ ^g ggifa 4H4t4tfapF5gr n n 
g otttPt g^R g %f% g: i 
g^g: g gg Prcwr, ii «$. 11 

f^nHg4 i 

sftgi^Kwg^ ggi g?4t g Hg4 11 so n 
^ggT <!»l«di3^ii ggT grPg gjfeg i 
. ^ggiggifg^gr grPg ggT 11 s<£ 11 
P#ot 3^r% ggj grggnggggg, i 
gg^^ggi gggrt ggr i^gfg i^O n 11 
g^gig 1%3%g ^ ^ ^gggg i 
gi^fg g??f ^4 isg% n h 



it m ii 

'reM '♦><*«$>: I 


«r$: wfaw^' fcRforptfta& II ^ || 

cFRT S'raPTJ^ ^Fjj *T Slffclfcl I 

RT %f% <sftfd|t\4) t c N'b|-$*H *R5H3( - || 'AS || 
®P4 3RT toft^HRIT: | 

MfdHki qi^TRn^fiRrfRRf^: || 'a'A || 

1*^ | 

R ^ ^Rkll^WsjMI 55f^TT || ^ || 

•T d4lR^ hWH I 

4t RtF?: || ’AO | 

3 T^45rPRTI^^W SfrFi: 3R f^RTF | 

^ HI*W^«I R*r^ || 'Ad || 

^rt% Rfi^4t rtRT jprfi® 333 | 
^WRRNI^fl R^P^TFTOp: || <a^ || 
3 5 F^ITf^R3^ 3^1 4VlF$f^dl< I 
®R^ *fl<sf^dll^« < <i: fll^Rtld^^ || ^o || 
5TRF4H f^lt^ RTJTlRfa ^ R5R: | 

*T: Rf4 STWFTl4fiHkRpl%: II M II 





i 

^ sftolfrr 55f^rTT ^fTTOKj sprsgf^ || ^ || 
* rw fts aftg I 

PlHW: || ^ || 

^HWffrfcr %ff 5^?m spqgTg | 

Wlf WTTJTtfs ^RTtssff ^flM: || II 
f^HRff ^F3«TT^T ^TT^^fci: I 
•IFFT 7TS5T g^ || ^'-\ || 

^ II ^ II 

^fagggHt^qf^r 1 
^ TtW^ || ^vs‘ || 

gpHfaft&i gr^n gort i 

^f^ggpgFq l^png^gg n s^c h 
f^RgT^gggg i 

ftragprassn* ^n gi^sg^rg h ^ n 

^ffam^nfnr ftfer: f*gw | 

^3 g^4 gFr^Tf^g^a n \ao h 

II II 

W* ?fawrfcl * ^rftf ft flfetl : I 
fawjdWHtf: %f¥^giW!': || || 



•f 3R*dMi+ww.: I 

^IPT^THW q>l(dd || || 

^ qqfa «f^T i 

^ 5Rif% q«n sfrfqsfrmrqft *Rr^ n w n 
qurenpraresr q^T ^31^ 1 

?flf^fMK=t(^»i: || vs^ || 
?pRFRI^m5^T: | 

+)rtH|^q«ta ^q^T5fT^4 d«TT || || 

^WWMIA^T ^TWT cTT?f: q«5^ | 
snTasfw^^ sfWsft II ^ n 

3 =qgqT fcTT ^q q 3 % fqjJjNt: | 
^q^TWTTf^ ^cn q: faf^qngq;: II vsc II 
S ^ f^TT 3 $ I 

qt ^ ^Rhi^i: s fqqj qff^qf^ n n 
; n^ sffacr Mt q *q*)foi 3 <ft 1 
^T^rqTfnRr sffaig: qq^T: q^|| ^ o || 
ffa ?r qrfqq ^} fj=wqq 1 

qjf^n^ ^nqrw^Tq q^rrqq n ^ hi 

q^q jfcqT ?ftfq? 7 T q^T q fc q faq 5^ 1 

q ^qyqq^ || || 

*h faljSWl ^t ^K^diq =q I 

$«t£d qtf?Rr: StepS: p fH*j,d : || £\ || 



^T^°T m ^ rRTft pR^fi^d || <£« It 

fldlrh tdN^d*^ | 

TO f^FcR^ II ^ II 

$R pT JTfT^ft d^Fftl SRT^rft | 


sffcjjT — 

«ft§*uNt «iraT sMfcarfaw* it <j$. ii 
STHFPillP: ?W: gsR^S*!^ II <£5i II 


5% sftsffirTSg^ 3fR^^ 


IffoffSwnq: II 


vv 


3fc5?fTgt[5HnT^rH |l 


Printed by J. R. Aria, at the Vasanta Press, Adyar, Madras. 

V 



